Occupational Therapy Practice
Framework: Domain and Process
Fourth Edition
Preface
The fourth edition of the Occupational Therapy Practice Framework: Domain
and Process (hereinafter referred to as the OTPF–4), is an official document of
the American Occupational Therapy Association (AOTA). Intended for
occupational therapy practitioners and students, other health care
professionals, educators, researchers, payers, policymakers, and consumers,
the OTPF–4 presents a summary of interrelated constructs that describe
occupational therapy practice.
Definitions
Within the OTPF–4, occupational therapy is defined as the therapeutic use of
everyday life occupations with persons, groups, or populations (i.e., the client)
for the purpose of enhancing or enabling participation. Occupational therapy
practitioners use their knowledge of the transactional relationship among the
client, the client’s engagement in valuable occupations, and the context to
design occupation-based intervention plans. Occupational therapy services
are provided for habilitation, rehabilitation, and promotion of health and
wellness for clients with disability- and non–disability-related needs. These
services include acquisition and preservation of occupational identity for
clients who have or are at risk for developing an illness, injury, disease,
disorder, condition, impairment, disability, activity limitation, or participation
restriction (AOTA, 2011; see the glossary in Appendix A for additional
definitions).
When the term occupational therapy practitioners is used in this
document, it refers to both occupational therapists and occupational therapy
assistants (AOTA, 2015b). Occupational therapists are responsible for all
aspects of occupational therapy service delivery and are accountable for the
safety and effectiveness of the occupational therapy service delivery process.
Contents
Preface .....................................................................1
Definitions ..........................................................1
Evolution of This Document ..............................2
Vision for This Work ..........................................4
Introduction ..............................................................4
Occupation and Occupational Science ...........4
OTPF Organization .......................................4
Cornerstones of Occupational Therapy
Practice ......................................................6
Domain .....................................................................6
Occupations .......................................................7
Contexts ............................................................9
Performance Patterns .....................................12
Performance Skills ..........................................13
Client Factors ..................................................15
Process ..................................................................17
Overview of the Occupational Therapy
Process ....................................................17
Evaluation ........................................................21
Intervention ......................................................24
Outcomes ........................................................26
Conclusion .............................................................28
Tables ....................................................................29
References .............................................................68
Table 1. Examples of Clients: Persons, Groups,
and Populations ............................................ 29
Table 2. Occupations ......................................30
Table 3. Examples of Occupations for Persons,
Groups, and Populations ..............................35
Table 4. Context: Environmental Factors .......36
Table 5. Context: Personal Factors ................40
Table 6. Performance Patterns .......................41
Table 7. Performance Skills for Persons .......43
Table 8. Performance Skills for Groups .........50
Table 9. Client Factors ....................................51
Table 10. Occupational Therapy Process for
Persons, Groups, and Populations .............55
Table 11. Occupation and Activity
Demands ......................................................57
GUIDELINES
AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT 	1
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p1
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 1 of 87 --

Occupational therapy assistants deliver occupational therapy services under
the supervision of and in partnership with an occupational therapist (AOTA,
2020a).
The clients of occupational therapy are typically classified as persons
(including those involved in care of a client), groups (collections of individuals
having shared characteristics or a common or shared purpose; e.g., family
members, workers, students, people with similar interests or occupational
challenges), and populations (aggregates of people with common attributes
such as contexts, characteristics, or concerns, including health risks; Scaffa
& Reitz, 2014). People may also consider themselves as part of a community,
such as the Deaf community or the disability community; a community is a
collection of populations that is changeable and diverse and includes various
people, groups, networks, and organizations (Scaffa, 2019; World Federation
of Occupational Therapists [WFOT], 2019). It is important to consider the
community or communities with which a client identifies throughout the
occupational therapy process.
Whether the client is a person, group, or population, information about the
client’s wants, needs, strengths, contexts, limitations, and occupational risks is
gathered, synthesized, and framed from an occupational perspective. Throughout
the OTPF–4, the term client is used broadly to refer to persons, groups, and
populations unless otherwise specified. In the OTPF–4, “group” as a client is distinct
from “group” as an intervention approach. For examples of clients, see Table 1 (all
tables are placed together at the end of this document). The glossary in Appendix
A provides definitions of other terms used in this document.
Evolution of This Document
The Occupational Therapy Practice Framework was originally developed to
articulate occupational therapy’s distinct perspective and contribution to
promoting the health and participation of persons, groups, and populations
through engagement in occupation. The first edition of the OTPF emerged
from an examination of documents related to the Occupational Therapy Product
Output Reporting System and Uniform Terminology for Reporting Occupational
Therapy Services (AOTA, 1979). Originally a document that responded to a federal
requirement to develop a uniform reporting system, this text gradually shifted to
describing and outlining the domains of concern of occupational therapy.
The second edition of Uniform Terminology for Occupational Therapy
(AOTA, 1989) was adopted by the AOTA Representative Assembly (RA) and
published in 1989. The document focused on delineating and defining only
the occupational performance areas and occupational performance components
that are addressed in occupational therapy direct services. The third and final
edition of Uniform Terminology for Occupational Therapy (UT–III; AOTA, 1994)
was adopted by the RA in 1994 and was “expanded to reflect current practice
and to incorporate contextual aspects of performance” (p. 1047). Each revision
Table 12. Types of Occupational Therapy
Interventions ................................................59
Table 13. Approaches to Intervention ............63
Table 14. Outcomes ........................................65
Exhibit 1. Aspects of the Occupational Therapy
Domain ...........................................................7
Exhibit 2. Operationalizing the Occupational
Therapy Process .........................................16
Figure 1. Occupational Therapy Domain and
Process ..........................................................5
Authors ............................................................72
Acknowledgments ...........................................73
Appendix A. Glossary .....................................74
Index ................................................................85
Copyright © 2020 by the American
Occupational Therapy Association.
Citation: American Occupational Therapy
Association. (2020). Occupational therapy
practice framework: Domain and process
(4th ed.). American Journal of Occupational
Therapy, 74(Suppl. 2), 7412410010. https://doi.
org/10.5014/ajot.2020.74S2001
ISBN: 978-1-56900-488-3
For permissions inquiries, visit https://www.
copyright.com.
GUIDELINES
2 	AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p2
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 2 of 87 --

reflected changes in practice and provided consistent
terminology for use by the profession.
In fall 1998, the AOTA Commission on Practice (COP)
embarked on the journey that culminated in the
Occupational Therapy Practice Framework: Domain
and Process (AOTA, 2002a). At that time, AOTA also
published The Guide to Occupational Therapy Practice
(Moyers, 1999), which outlined contemporary practice
for the profession. Using this document and the feedback
received during the review process for the UT–III, the COP
proceeded to develop a document that more fully
articulated occupational therapy.
The OTPF is an ever-evolving document. As an
official AOTA document, it is reviewed on a 5-year
cycle for usefulness and the potential need for further
refinements or changes. During the review period, the COP
collects feedback from AOTA members, scholars, authors,
practitioners, AOTA volunteer leadership and staff, and
other stakeholders. The revision process ensures that the
OTPF maintains its integrity while responding to internal and
external influences that should be reflected in emerging
concepts and advances in occupational therapy.
The OTPF was first revised and approved by the RA in
2008. Changes to the document included refinement of the
writing and the addition of emerging concepts and changes
in occupational therapy. The rationale for specific changes
can be found in Table 11 of the OTPF–2 (AOTA, 2008,
pp. 665–667).
In 2012, the process of review and revision of the
OTPF was initiated again, and several changes were
made. The rationale for specific changes can be found
on page S2 of the OTPF–3 (AOTA, 2014).
In 2018, the process to revise the OTPF began again.
After member review and feedback, several modifications
were made and are reflected in this document:
n The focus on group and population clients is
increased, and examples are provided for both.
n Cornerstones of occupational therapy practice are
identified and described as foundational to the
success of occupational therapy practitioners.
n Occupational science is more explicitly described
and defined.
n The terms occupation and activity are more clearly
defined.
n For occupations, the definition of sexual activity as an
activity of daily living is revised, health management is
added as a general occupation category, and intimate
partner is added in the social participation category
(see Table 2).
n The contexts and environments aspect of the
occupational therapy domain is changed to context on
the basis of the World Health Organization (WHO; 2008)
taxonomy from the International Classification of
Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF) in an effort
to adopt standard, well-accepted definitions (see
Table 4).
n For the client factors category of body functions,
gender identity is now included under “experience of
self and time,” the definition of psychosocial is
expanded to match the ICF description, and
interoception is added under sensory functions.
n For types of intervention, “preparatory methods and
tasks” has been changed to “interventions to support
occupations” (see Table 12).
n For outcomes, transitions and discontinuation are
discussed as conclusions to occupational therapy
services, and patient-reported outcomes are
addressed (see Table 14).
n Five new tables are added to expand on and clarify
concepts:
+ Table 1. Examples of Clients: Persons, Groups,
and Populations
+ Table 3. Examples of Occupations for Persons,
Groups, and Populations
+ Table 7. Performance Skills for Persons (includes
examples of effective and ineffective
performance skills)
+ Table 8. Performance Skills for Groups
(includes examples of the impact of ineffective
individual performance skills on group
collective outcome)
+ Table 10. Occupational Therapy Process for
Persons, Groups, and Populations.
n Throughout, the use of OTPF rather than Framework
acknowledges the current requirements for a unique
GUIDELINES
AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT 	3
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p3
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 3 of 87 --

identifier to maximize digital discoverability and to
promote brevity in social media communications. It
also reflects the longstanding use of the acronym in
academic teaching and clinical practice.
n Figure 1 has been revised to provide a simplified
visual depiction of the domain and process of
occupational therapy.
Vision for This Work
Although this edition of the OTPF represents the latest in
the profession’s efforts to clearly articulate the
occupational therapy domain and process, it builds on a
set of values that the profession has held since its
founding in 1917. The original vision had at its center a
profound belief in the value of therapeutic occupations as
a way to remediate illness and maintain health (Slagle,
1924). The founders emphasized the importance of
establishing a therapeutic relationship with each client
and designing a treatment plan based on knowledge
about the client’s environment, values, goals, and desires
(Meyer, 1922). They advocated for scientific practice
based on systematic observation and treatment (Dunton,
1934). Paraphrased using today’s lexicon, the founders
proposed a vision that was occupation based, client
centered, contextual, and evidence based—the vision
articulated in the OTPF–4.
Introduction
The purpose of a framework is to provide a structure or
base on which to build a system or a concept
(“Framework,” 2020). The OTPF describes the central
concepts that ground occupational therapy practice and
builds a common understanding of the basic tenets and
vision of the profession. The OTPF–4 does not serve as a
taxonomy, theory, or model of occupational therapy. By
design, the OTPF–4 must be used to guide occupational
therapy practice in conjunction with the knowledge and
evidence relevant to occupation and occupational
therapy within the identified areas of practice and with the
appropriate clients. In addition, the OTPF–4 is intended
to be a valuable tool in the academic preparation of
students, communication with the public and
policymakers, and provision of language that can shape
and be shaped by research.
Occupation and Occupational Science
Embedded in this document is the occupational therapy
profession’s core belief in the positive relationship
between occupation and health and its view of people as
occupational beings. Occupational therapy practice
emphasizes the occupational nature of humans and the
importance of occupational identity (Unruh, 2004) to
healthful, productive, and satisfying living. As Hooper and
Wood (2019) stated,
A core philosophical assumption of the profession, therefore, is that by
virtue of our biological endowment, people of all ages and abilities
require occupation to grow and thrive; in pursuing occupation, humans
express the totality of their being, a mind–body–spirit union. Because
human existence could not otherwise be, humankind is, in essence,
occupational by nature. (p. 46)
Occupational science is important to the practice of
occupational therapy and “provides a way of thinking that
enables an understanding of occupation, the occupational
nature of humans, the relationship between occupation,
health and well-being, and the influences that shape
occupation” (WFOT, 2012b, p. 2). Many of its concepts are
emphasized throughout the OTPF–4, including
occupational justice and injustice, identity, time use,
satisfaction, engagement, and performance.
OTPF Organization
The OTPF–4 is divided into two major sections: (1) the
domain, which outlines the profession’s purview and the
areas in which its members have an established body
of knowledge and expertise, and (2) the process,
which describes the actions practitioners take when
providing services that are client centered and
focused on engagement in occupations. The
profession’s understanding of the domain and process
of occupational therapy guides practitioners as they
seek to support clients’ participation in daily living,
which results from the dynamic intersection of clients,
their desired engagements, and their contexts
(including environmental and personal factors;
GUIDELINES
4 	AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p4
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 4 of 87 --

Christiansen & Baum, 1997; Christiansen et al., 2005;
Law et al., 2005).
“Achieving health, well-being, and participation in life
through engagement in occupation” is the overarching
statement that describes the domain and process of
occupational therapy in its fullest sense. This statement
acknowledges the profession’s belief that active
engagement in occupation promotes, facilitates,
supports, and maintains health and participation. These
interrelated concepts include
n Health—“a state of complete physical, mental,
and social well-being, and not merely the
absence of disease or infirmity” (WHO, 2006,
p. 1).
n Well-being—“a general term encompassing the total
universe of human life domains, including physical,
mental, and social aspects, that make up what can be
called a ‘good life’” (WHO, 2006, p. 211).
n Participation—“involvement in a life situation” (WHO,
2008, p. 10). Participation occurs naturally when clients
are actively involved in carrying out occupations or daily
life activities they find purposeful and meaningful. More
specific outcomes of occupational therapy intervention
are multidimensional and support the end result of
participation.
n Engagement in occupation—performance of
occupations as the result of choice, motivation, and
meaning within a supportive context (including
Figure 1. Occupational Therapy Domain and Process
Achieving health,
well-being, and
participation in life
through engagement
in occupation.
P R
O
C
E
S
S
D
O
M
A
I
N
C
l
i
e
n
t
F
a
c
t
o
r
s
O
c
c
u
p
a
ti
o
n
s
Co
n
t
e
x
t
s
P
e
r
f
o
r
m a n c e S k i l l s
	P
e
r
f
o
r
m
a
n
c
e
P
a
t
t
e
r
n
s
I
n
t
e
r
v
e
n
tion
O
u
t
c
o
m
e
s
E
v
a
l
u
a
t
i
o
n
GUIDELINES
AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT 	5
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p5
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 5 of 87 --

environmental and personal factors). Engagement
includes objective and subjective aspects of clients’
experiences and involves the transactional interaction
of the mind, body, and spirit. Occupational therapy
intervention focuses on creating or facilitating
opportunities to engage in occupations that lead to
participation in desired life situations (AOTA, 2008).
Although the domain and process are described
separately, in actuality they are linked inextricably in a
transactional relationship. The aspects that constitute
the domain and those that constitute the process exist in
constant interaction with one another during the delivery of
occupational therapy services. Figure 1 represents
aspects of the domain and process and the overarching
goal of the profession as achieving health, well-being, and
participation in life through engagement in occupation.
Although the figure illustrates these two elements in
distinct spaces, in reality the domain and process interact
in complex and dynamic ways as described throughout
this document. The nature of the interactions is
impossible to capture in a static one-dimensional image.
Cornerstones of Occupational Therapy Practice
The transactional relationship between the domain and
process is facilitated by the occupational therapy
practitioner. Occupational therapy practitioners have
distinct knowledge, skills, and qualities that contribute to the
success of the occupational therapy process, described in
this document as “cornerstones.” A cornerstone can be
defined as something of great importance on which
everything else depends (“Cornerstone,” n.d.), and the
following cornerstones of occupational therapy help
distinguish it from other professions:
n Core values and beliefs rooted in occupation (Cohn,
2019; Hinojosa et al., 2017)
n Knowledge of and expertise in the therapeutic use of
occupation (Gillen, 2013; Gillen et al., 2019)
n Professional behaviors and dispositions (AOTA
2015a, 2015c)
n Therapeutic use of self (AOTA, 2015c; Taylor, 2020).
These cornerstones are not hierarchical; instead, each
concept influences the others.
Occupational therapy cornerstones provide a
fundamental foundation for practitioners from which to
view clients and their occupations and facilitate the
occupational therapy process. Practitioners develop the
cornerstones over time through education, mentorship,
and experience. In addition, the cornerstones are ever
evolving, reflecting developments in occupational therapy
practice and occupational science.
Many contributors influence each cornerstone. Like
the cornerstones, the contributors are complementary
and interact to provide a foundation for practitioners.
The contributors include, but are not limited to, the
following:
n Client-centered practice
n Clinical and professional reasoning
n Competencies for practice
n Cultural humility
n Ethics
n Evidence-informed practice
n Inter- and intraprofessional collaborations
n Leadership
n Lifelong learning
n Micro and macro systems knowledge
n Occupation-based practice
n Professionalism
n Professional advocacy
n Self-advocacy
n Self-reflection
n Theory-based practice.
Domain
Exhibit 1 identifies the aspects of the occupational
therapy domain: occupations, contexts, performance
patterns, performance skills, and client factors. All
aspects of the domain have a dynamic interrelatedness.
All aspects are of equal value and together interact to
affect occupational identity, health, well-being, and
participation in life.
Occupational therapists are skilled in evaluating all
aspects of the domain, the interrelationships among the
aspects, and the client within context. Occupational
therapy practitioners recognize the importance and
GUIDELINES
6 	AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p6
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 6 of 87 --

impact of the mind–body–spirit connection on
engagement and participation in daily life. Knowledge of
the transactional relationship and the significance of
meaningful and productive occupations forms the basis for
the use of occupations as both the means and the ends
of interventions (Trombly, 1995). This knowledge sets
occupational therapy apart as a distinct and valuable
service (Hildenbrand & Lamb, 2013) for which a focus on
the whole is considered stronger than a focus on isolated
aspects of human functioning.
The discussion that follows provides a brief
explanation of each aspect of the domain. Tables included
at the end of the document provide additional
descriptions and definitions of terms.
Occupations
Occupations are central to a client’s (person’s, group’s, or
population’s) health, identity, and sense of competence
and have particular meaning and value to that client. “In
occupational therapy, occupations refer to the everyday
activities that people do as individuals, in families, and with
communities to occupy time and bring meaning and
purpose to life. Occupations include things people
need to, want to and are expected to do” (WFOT, 2012a,
para. 2).
In the OTPF–4, the term occupation denotes
personalized and meaningful engagement in daily life
events by a specific client. Conversely, the term activity
denotes a form of action that is objective and not related
to a specific client’s engagement or context (Schell et al.,
2019) and, therefore, can be selected and designed to
enhance occupational engagement by supporting the
development of performance skills and performance
patterns. Both occupations and activities are used as
interventions by practitioners. For example, a practitioner
may use the activity of chopping vegetables during an
intervention to address fine motor skills with the ultimate
goal of improving motor skills for the occupation of
preparing a favorite meal. Participation in occupations is
considered both the means and the end in the
occupational therapy process.
Occupations occur in contexts and are influenced by
the interplay among performance patterns, performance
skills, and client factors. Occupations occur over time;
have purpose, meaning, and perceived utility to the client;
and can be observed by others (e.g., preparing a meal) or
be known only to the person involved (e.g., learning
through reading a textbook). Occupations can involve the
execution of multiple activities for completion and can
result in various outcomes.
The OTPF–4 identifies a broad range of occupations
categorized as activities of daily living (ADLs), instrumental
activities of daily living (IADLs), health management, rest
and sleep, education, work, play, leisure, and social
participation (Table 2). Within each of these nine broad
categories of occupation are many specific occupations. For
example, the broad category of IADLs has specific
Exhibit 1. Aspects of the Occupational Therapy Domain
All aspects of the occupational therapy domain transact to support engagement, participation, and health. This exhibit does not imply
a hierarchy.
Occupations 	Contexts
Performance
Patterns
Performance
Skills 	Client Factors
Activities of daily living (ADLs)
Instrumental activities of daily
living (IADLs)
Health management
Rest and sleep
Education
Work
Play
Leisure
Social participation
Environmental
factors
Personal factors
Habits
Routines
Roles
Rituals
Motor skills
Process skills
Social interaction skills
Values, beliefs,
and spirituality
Body functions
Body structures
GUIDELINES
AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT 	7
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p7
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 7 of 87 --

occupations that include grocery shopping and money
management.
When occupational therapy practitioners work with
clients, they identify the types of occupations clients
engage in individually or with others. Differences among
clients and the occupations they engage in are complex
and multidimensional. The client’s perspective on how an
occupation is categorized varies depending on that
client’s needs, interests, and contexts. Moreover, values
attached to occupations are dependent on cultural and
sociopolitical determinants (Wilcock & Townsend, 2019).
For example, one person may perceive gardening as
leisure, whereas another person, who relies on the food
produced from that garden to feed their family or
community, may perceive it as work. Additional examples
of occupations for persons, groups, and populations can
be found in Table 3.
The ways in which clients prioritize engagement in
selected occupations may vary at different times. For
example, clients in a community psychiatric rehabilitation
setting may prioritize registering to vote during an election
season and food preparation during holidays. The unique
features of occupations are noted and analyzed by
occupational therapy practitioners, who consider all
components of the engagement and use them effectively
as both a therapeutic tool and a way to achieve the
targeted outcomes of intervention.
The extent to which a client is engaged in a particular
occupation is also important. Occupational therapy
practitioners assess the client’s ability to engage in
occupational performance, defined as the
accomplishment of the selected occupation resulting from
the dynamic transaction among the client, their contexts,
and the occupation. Occupations can contribute to a well-
balanced and fully functional lifestyle or to a lifestyle that is
out of balance and characterized by occupational
dysfunction. For example, excessive work without
sufficient regard for other aspects of life, such as sleep or
relationships, places clients at risk for health problems.
External factors, including war, natural disasters, or
extreme poverty, may hinder a client’s ability to create
balance or engage in certain occupations (AOTA, 2017b;
McElroy et al., 2012).
Because occupational performance does not exist in a
vacuum, context must always be considered. For example,
for a client who lives in food desert, lack of access to a
grocery store may limit their ability to have balance in their
performance of IADLs such as cooking and grocery
shopping or to follow medical advice from health care
professionals on health management and preparation of
nutritious meals. For this client, the limitation is not caused by
impaired client factors or performance skills but rather is
shaped by the context in which the client functions. This
context may include policies that resulted in the decline of
commercial properties in the area, a socioeconomic status
that does not enable the client to live in an area with access
to a grocery store, and a social environment in which lack of
access to fresh food is weighed as less important than the
social supports the community provides.
Occupational therapy practitioners recognize that
health is supported and maintained when clients are able
to engage in home, school, workplace, and community
life. Thus, practitioners are concerned not only with
occupations but also with the variety of factors that disrupt
or empower those occupations and influence clients’
engagement and participation in positive health-
promoting occupations (Wilcock & Townsend, 2019).
Although engagement in occupations is generally
considered a positive outcome of the occupational therapy
process, it is important to consider that a client’s history
might include negative, traumatic, or unhealthy
occupational participation (Robinson Johnson & Dickie,
2019). For example, a person who has experienced a
traumatic sexual encounter might negatively perceive and
react to engagement in sexual intimacy. A person with an
eating disorder might engage in eating in a maladaptive
way, deterring health management and physical health.
In addition, some occupations that are meaningful to a
client might also hinder performance in other occupations
or negatively affect health. For example, a person who
spends a disproportionate amount of time playing video
games may develop a repetitive stress injury and may
have less balance in their time spent on IADLs and other
forms of social participation. A client engaging in the
recreational use of prescription pain medications may
experience barriers to participation in previously
GUIDELINES
8 	AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p8
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 8 of 87 --

important occupations such as work or spending time with
family.
Occupations have the capacity to support or promote
other occupations. For example, children engage in play
to develop the performance skills that later facilitate
engagement in leisure and work. Adults may engage in
social participation and leisure with an intimate partner
that may improve satisfaction with sexual activity. The
goal of engagement in sleep and health management
includes maintaining or improving performance of work,
leisure, social participation, and other occupations.
Occupations are often shared and done with others.
Those that implicitly involve two or more individuals are
termed co-occupations (Zemke & Clark, 1996). Co-
occupations are the most interactive of all social
occupations. Central to the concept of co-occupation is that
two or more individuals share a high level of physicality,
emotionality, and intentionality (Pickens & Pizur-Barnekow,
2009). In addition, co-occupations can be parallel (different
occupations in close proximity to others; e.g., reading while
others listen to music when relaxing at home) and shared
(same occupation but different activities; e.g., preparing
different dishes for a meal; Zemke & Clark, 1996).
Caregiving is a co-occupation that requires active
participation by both the caregiver and the recipient of
care. For the co-occupations required during parenting,
the socially interactive routines of eating, feeding, and
comforting may involve the parent, a partner, the child,
and significant others (Olson, 2004). The specific
occupations inherent in this social interaction are
reciprocal, interactive, and nested (Dunlea, 1996; Esdaile
& Olson, 2004). Consideration of co-occupations by
practitioners supports an integrated view of the client’s
engagement in the context of relationship to significant
others.
Occupational participation can be considered
independent whether it occurs individually or with others. It
is important to acknowledge that clients can be
independent in living regardless of the amount of
assistance they receive while completing occupations.
Clients may be considered independent even when they
direct others (e.g., caregivers) in performing the actions
necessary to participate, regardless of the amount or kind
of assistance required, if clients are satisfied with their
performance. In contrast to definitions of independence
that imply direct physical interaction with the environment
or objects within the environment, occupational therapy
practitioners consider clients to be independent whether
they perform the specific occupations by themselves, in an
adapted or modified environment, with the use of various
devices or alternative strategies, or while overseeing
activity completion by others (AOTA, 2002b). For
example, a person with spinal cord injury who directs a
personal care assistant to assist them with ADLs is
demonstrating independence in this essential aspect of
their life.
It is also important to acknowledge that not all clients
view success as independence. Interdependence, or
co-occupational performance, can also be an indicator
of personal success. How a client views success may
be influenced by their client factors, including their
culture.
Contexts
Context is a broad construct defined as the environmental
and personal factors specific to each client (person, group,
population) that influence engagement and participation
in occupations. Context affects clients’ access to
occupations and the quality of and satisfaction with
performance (WHO, 2008). Practitioners recognize that
for people to truly achieve full participation, meaning, and
purpose, they must not only function but also engage
comfortably within their own distinct combination of
contexts.
In the literature, the terms environment and context
often are used interchangeably, but this may result in
confusion when describing aspects of situations in which
occupational engagement takes place. Understanding the
contexts in which occupations can and do occur provides
practitioners with insights into the overarching, underlying,
and embedded influences of environmental factors and
personal factors on engagement in occupations.
Environmental Factors
Environmental factors are aspects of the physical, social,
and attitudinal surroundings in which people live and
GUIDELINES
AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT 	9
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p9
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 9 of 87 --

conduct their lives (Table 4). Environmental factors
influence functioning and disability and have positive
aspects (facilitators) or negative aspects (barriers or
hindrances; WHO, 2008). Environmental factors include
n Natural environment and human-made changes to
the environment: Animate and inanimate elements of
the natural or physical environment and
components of that environment that have been
modified by people, as well as characteristics of
human populations within that environment.
Engagement in human occupation influences the
sustainability of the natural environment, and
changes to human behavior can have a positive
impact on the environment (Dennis et al., 2015).
n Products and technology: Natural or human-made
products or systems of products, equipment, and
technology that are gathered, created, produced, or
manufactured.
n Support and relationships: People or animals that
provide practical physical or emotional support,
nurturing, protection, assistance, and connections to
other persons in the home, workplace, or school or at
play or in other aspects of daily occupations.
n Attitudes: Observable evidence of customs,
practices, ideologies, values, norms, factual beliefs,
and religious beliefs held by people other than the
client.
n Services, systems, and policies: Benefits,
structured programs, and regulations for operations
provided by institutions in various sectors of society
designed to meet the needs of persons, groups, and
populations.
When people interact with the world around them,
environmental factors can either enable or restrict
participation in meaningful occupations and can present
barriers to or supports and resources for service delivery.
Examples of environmental barriers that restrict
participation include the following:
n For persons, doorway widths that do not allow for
wheelchair passage
n For groups, absence of healthy social opportunities
for those abstaining from alcohol use
n For populations, businesses that are not welcoming
to people who identify as LGBTQ+. (Note: In this
document, LGBTQ+ is used to represent the large
and diverse communities and individuals with
nonmajority sexual orientations and gender
identities.)
Addressing these barriers, such as by widening a doorway
to allow access, results in environmental supports that
enable participation. A client who has difficulty performing
effectively in one context may be successful when the
natural environment has human-made modifications or if the
client uses applicable products and technology. In addition,
occupational therapy practitioners must be aware of norms
related to, for example, eating or deference to medical
professionals when working with someone from a culture or
socioeconomic status that differs from their own.
Personal Factors
Personal factors are the unique features of a person that
are not part of a health condition or health state and that
constitute the particular background of the person’s life
and living (Table 5). Personal factors are internal
influences affecting functioning and disability and are not
considered positive or negative but rather reflect the
essence of the person—“who they are.” When clients
provide demographic information, they are typically
describing personal factors. Personal factors also
include customs, beliefs, activity patterns, behavioral
standards, and expectations accepted by the society or
cultural group of which a person is a member.
Personal factors are generally considered to be
enduring, stable attributes of the person, although some
personal factors change over time. They include, but are
not limited to, the following:
n Chronological age
n Sexual orientation (sexual preference, sexual
identity)
n Gender identity
n Race and ethnicity
n Cultural identification and attitudes
GUIDELINES
10 	AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p10
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 10 of 87 --

n Social background, social status, and socioeconomic
status
n Upbringing and life experiences
n Habits and past and current behavioral patterns
n Psychological assets, temperament, unique
character traits, and coping styles
n Education
n Profession and professional identity
n Lifestyle
n Health conditions and fitness status (that may affect
the person’s occupations but are not the primary
concern of the occupational therapy encounter).
For example, siblings share personal factors of race
and age, yet for those separated at birth, environmental
differences may result in divergent personal factors in
terms of cultural identification, upbringing, and life
experiences, producing different contexts for their
individual occupational engagement. Whether separated
or raised together, as siblings move through life, they may
develop differences in sexual orientation, life experience,
habits, education, profession, and lifestyle.
Groups and populations are often formed or identified
on the basis of shared or similar personal factors that make
possible occupational therapy assessment and
intervention. Of course, individual members of a group or
population differ in other personal factors. For example, a
group of fifth graders in a community public school are
likely to share age and, perhaps, socioeconomic status.
Yet race, fitness, habits, and coping styles make each
group member unlike the others. Similarly, a population of
older adults living in an urban low-income housing
community may have few personal factors in common other
than age and current socioeconomic status.
Application of Context to Occupational Justice
Interwoven throughout the concept of context is that of
occupational justice, defined as “a justice that
recognizes occupational rights to inclusive participation
in everyday occupations for all persons in society,
regardless of age, ability, gender, social class, or other
differences” (Nilsson & Townsend, 2010, p. 58).
Occupational therapy’s focus on engagement in
occupations and occupational justice complements
WHO’s (2008) perspective on health. To broaden the
understanding of the effects of disease and disability on
health, WHO emphasized that health can be affected by the
inability to carry out occupations and activities and
participate in life situations caused by contextual barriers
and by problems that exist in body structures and body
functions. The OTPF–4 identifies occupational justice as
both an aspect of contexts and an outcome of intervention.
Occupational justice involves the concern that
occupational therapy practitioners have with respect,
fairness, and impartiality and equitable opportunities
when considering the contexts of persons, groups, and
populations (AOTA, 2015a). As part of the occupational
therapy domain, practitioners consider how these
aspects can affect the implementation of occupational
therapy and the target outcome of participation.
Practitioners recognize that for individuals to truly
achieve full participation, meaning, and purpose, they
must not only function but also engage comfortably within
their own distinct combination of contexts (both
environmental factors and personal factors).
Examples of contexts that can present occupational
justice issues include the following:
n An alternative school placement for children with
mental health and behavioral disabilities that
provides academic support and counseling but
limited opportunities for participation in sports,
music programs, and organized social activities
n A residential facility for older adults that offers safety
and medical support but provides little opportunity for
engagement in the role-related occupations that were
once a source of meaning
n A community that lacks accessible and inclusive
physical environments and provides limited services
and supports, making participation difficult or even
dangerous for people who have disabilities (e.g.,
lack of screening facilities and services resulting in
higher rates of breast cancer among community
members)
n A community that lacks financial and other necessary
resources, resulting in an adverse and
GUIDELINES
AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT 	11
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p11
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 11 of 87 --

disproportionate impact of natural disasters and
severe weather events on vulnerable populations.
Occupational therapy practitioners recognize areas of
occupational injustice and work to support policies,
actions, and laws that allow people to engage in
occupations that provide purpose and meaning in their
lives. By understanding and addressing the specific
justice issues in contexts such as an individual’s home, a
group’s shared job site, or a population’s community
center, practitioners promote occupational therapy
outcomes that address empowerment and self-
advocacy.
Performance Patterns
Performance patterns are the acquired habits, routines,
roles, and rituals used in the process of engaging
consistently in occupations and can support or hinder
occupational performance (Table 6). Performance
patterns help establish lifestyles (Uyeshiro Simon &
Collins, 2017) and occupational balance (e.g., proportion
of time spent in productive, restorative, and leisure
occupations; Eklund et al., 2017; Wagman et al., 2015)
and are shaped, in part, by context (e.g., consistency,
work hours, social calendars) and cultural norms (Eklund
et al., 2017; Larson & Zemke, 2003).
Time provides an organizational structure or rhythm for
performance patterns (Larson & Zemke, 2003); for
example, an adult goes to work every morning, a child
completes homework every day after school, or an
organization hosts a fundraiser every spring. The manner
in which people think about and use time is influenced by
biological rhythms (e.g., sleep–wake cycles), family of
origin (e.g., amount of time a person is socialized to
believe should be spent in productive occupations), work
and social schedules (e.g., religious services held on the
same day each week), and cyclic cultural patterns (e.g.,
birthday celebration with cake every year, annual cultural
festival; Larson & Zemke, 2003). Other temporal factors
influencing performance patterns are time management and
time use. Time management is the manner in which a
person, group, or population organizes, schedules, and
prioritizes certain activities (Uyeshiro Simon & Collins, 2017).
Time use is the manner in which a person manages their
activity levels; adapts to changes in routines; and organizes
their days, weeks, and years (Edgelow & Krupa, 2011).
Habits are specific, automatic adaptive or maladaptive
behaviors. Habits may be healthy or unhealthy (e.g.,
exercising on a daily basis vs. smoking during every
lunch break), efficient or inefficient (e.g., completing
homework after school vs. in the few minutes before the
school bus arrives), and supportive or harmful (e.g.,
setting an alarm clock before going to bed vs. not doing
so; Clark, 2000; Dunn, 2000; Matuska & Barrett, 2019).
Routines are established sequences of occupations or
activities that provide a structure for daily life; they can also
promote or damage health (Fiese, 2007; Koome et al.,
2012; Segal, 2004). Shared routines involve two or more
people and take place in a similar manner regardless of
the individuals involved (e.g., routines shared by parents
to promote the health of their children; routines shared by
coworkers to sort the mail; Primeau, 2000). Shared
routines can be nested in co-occupations. For example,
a young child’s occupation of completing oral hygiene
with the assistance of an adult is a part of the child’s daily
routine, and the adult who provides the assistance may
also view helping the young child with oral hygiene as a
part of the adult’s own daily routine.
Roles have historically been defined as sets of
behaviors expected by society and shaped by culture and
context; they may be further conceptualized and defined
by a person, group, or population (Kielhofner, 2008;
Taylor, 2017). Roles are an aspect of occupational
identity—that is, they help define who a person, group, or
population believes themselves to be on the basis of their
occupational history and desires for the future. Certain
roles are often associated with specific activities and
occupations; for example, the role of parent is associated
with feeding children (Kielhofner, 2008; Taylor, 2017).
When exploring roles, occupational therapy practitioners
consider the complexity of identity and the limitations
associated with assigning stereotypical occupations to
specific roles (e.g., on the basis of gender). Practitioners
also consider how clients construct their occupations and
establish efficient and supportive habits and routines to
achieve health outcomes, fulfill their perceived roles and
GUIDELINES
12 	AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p12
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 12 of 87 --

identity, and determine whether their roles reinforce their
values and beliefs.
Rituals are symbolic actions with spiritual, cultural, or
social meaning. Rituals contribute to a client’s identity and
reinforce the client’s values and beliefs (Fiese, 2007; Segal,
2004). Some rituals (e.g., those associated with certain
holidays) are associated with different seasons or times of
the year (e.g., New Year’s Eve, Independence Day),
whereas others are associated with times of the day or days
of the week (e.g., daily prayers, weekly family dinners).
Performance patterns are influenced by all other
aspects of the occupational therapy domain and develop
over time. Occupational therapy practitioners who
consider clients’ past and present behavioral and
performance patterns are better able to understand the
frequency and manner in which performance skills and
healthy and unhealthy occupations are, or have been,
integrated into clients’ lives. Although clients may have the
ability to engage in skilled performance, if they do not
embed essential skills in a productive set of engagement
patterns, their health, well-being, and participation may be
negatively affected. For example, a person may have
skills associated with proficient health literacy but not
embed them into consistent routines (e.g., a dietitian who
consistently chooses to eat fast food rather than prepare
a healthy meal) or struggle with modifying daily
performance patterns to access health systems effectively
(e.g., a nurse who struggles to modify work hours to get a
routine mammogram).
Performance Skills
Performance skills are observable, goal-directed actions
and consist of motor skills, process skills, and social
interaction skills (Fisher & Griswold, 2019; Table 7). The
occupational therapist evaluates and analyzes
performance skills during actual performance to
understand a client’s ability to perform an activity (i.e.,
smaller aspect of the larger occupation) in natural
contexts (Fisher & Marterella, 2019). This evaluation
requires analysis of the quality of the individual actions
(performance skills) during actual performance.
Regardless of the client population, the performance skills
defined in this document are universal and provide the
foundation for understanding performance (Fisher &
Marterella, 2019).
Performance skills can be analyzed for all occupations
with clients of any age and level of ability, regardless of the
setting in which occupational therapy services are
provided (Fisher & Marterella, 2019). Motor and process
skills are seen during performance of an activity that
involves the use of tangible objects, and social
interaction skills are seen in any situation in which a
person is interacting with others:
n Motor skills refer to how effectively a person moves
self or interacts with objects, including positioning the
body, obtaining and holding objects, moving self and
objects, and sustaining performance.
n Process skills refer to how effectively a person
organizes objects, time, and space, including
sustaining performance, applying knowledge,
organizing timing, organizing space and objects, and
adapting performance.
n Social interaction skills refer to how effectively a
person uses both verbal and nonverbal skills to
communicate, including initiating and terminating,
producing, physically supporting, shaping content of,
maintaining flow of, verbally supporting, and adapting
social interaction.
For example, when a client catches a ball, the
practitioner can analyze how effectively they bend and
reach for and then grasp the ball (motor skills). When a
client cooks a meal, the practitioner can analyze how
effectively they initiate and sequence the steps to
complete the recipe in a logical order to prepare the meal
in a timely and well-organized manner (process skills). Or
when a client interacts with a friend at work, the
practitioner can analyze the manner in which the client
smiles, gestures, turns toward the friend, and responds to
questions (social interaction skills). In these examples,
many other motor skills, process skills, and social
interaction skills are also used by the client.
By analyzing the client’s performance within an
occupation at the level of performance skills, the
occupational therapist identifies effective and ineffective
use of skills (Fisher & Marterella, 2019). The result of this
GUIDELINES
AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT 	13
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p13
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 13 of 87 --

analysis indicates not only whether the person is able to
complete an activity safely and independently but also
the amount of physical effort and efficiency the client
demonstrates in activities.
After the quality of occupational performance skills has
been analyzed, the practitioner speculates about the
reasons for decreased quality of occupational
performance and determines the need to evaluate
potential underlying causes (e.g., occupational demands,
environmental factors, client factors; Fisher & Griswold,
2019). Performance skills are different from client factors
(see the “Client Factors” section that follows), which
include values, beliefs, and spirituality and body
structures and functions (e.g., memory, strength) that
reside within the person. Occupational therapy
practitioners analyze performance skills as a client
performs an activity, whereas client factors cannot be
directly viewed during the performance of occupations.
For example, the occupational therapy practitioner
cannot directly view the client factors of cognitive ability or
memory when a client is engaged in cooking but rather
notes ineffective use of performance skills when the
person hesitates to start a step or performs steps in an
illogical order. The practitioner may then infer that a
possible reason for the client’s hesitation may be
diminished memory and elect to further assess the client
factor of cognition.
Similarly, context influences the quality of a client’s
occupational performance. After analyzing the client’s
performance skills while completing an activity, the
practitioner can hypothesize how the client factors and
context might have influenced the client’s performance.
Thus, client factors and contexts converge and may
support or limit a person’s quality of occupational
performance.
Application of Performance Skills With Persons
When completing the analysis of occupational
performance (described in the “Evaluation” section later in
this document), the practitioner analyzes the client’s
challenges in performance and generates a hypothesis
about gaps between current performance and effective
performance and the need for occupational therapy
services. To plan appropriate interventions, the
practitioner considers the underlying reasons for the gaps,
which may involve performance skills, performance
patterns, and client factors. The hypothesis is generated
on the basis of what the practitioner analyzes when the
client is actually performing occupations.
Regardless of the client population, the universal
performance skills defined in this section provide the
foundations for understanding performance (Fisher &
Marterella, 2019). The following example crosses many
client populations. The practitioner observes as a client
rushes through the steps of an activity toward completion.
On the basis of what the client does, the practitioner may
interpret this rushing as resulting from a lack of impulse
control. This limitation may be seen in clients living with
anxiety, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, dementia,
traumatic brain injury, and other clinical conditions. The
behavior of rushing may be captured in motor performance
skills of manipulates, coordinates, or calibrates; in process
performance skills of paces, initiates, continues, or
organizes; or in social interaction performance skills of
takes turn, transitions, times response, or times duration.
Understanding the client’s specific occupational challenges
enables the practitioner to determine the suitable
intervention to address impulsivity to facilitate greater
occupational performance. Clinical interventions then
address the skills required for the client’s specific
occupational demands on the basis of their alignment with
the universal performance skills (Fisher & Marterella, 2019).
Thus, the application of universal performance skills guides
practitioners in developing the intervention plan for specific
clients to address the specific concerns occurring in the
specific practice setting.
Application of Performance Skills With Groups
Analysis of performance skills is always focused on
individuals (Fisher & Marterella, 2019). Thus, when
analyzing performance skills with a group client, the
occupational therapist always focuses on one individual
at a time (Table 8). The therapist may choose to analyze
some or all members of the group engaging in relevant
group occupations over time as the group members
contribute to the collective actions of the group.
GUIDELINES
14 	AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p14
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 14 of 87 --

If all members demonstrate effective performance
skills, then the group client may achieve its collective
outcomes. If one or more group members demonstrate
ineffective performance skills, the collective outcomes
may be diminished. Only in cases in which group
members demonstrate ongoing limitations in
performance skills that hinder the collective outcomes of
the group would the practitioner recommend interventions
for individual group members. Interventions would then
be directed at those members demonstrating diminished
performance skills to facilitate their contributions to the
collective group outcomes.
Application of Performance Skills With Populations
Using an occupation-based approach to population
health, occupational therapy addresses the needs of
populations by enhancing occupational performance
and participation for communities of people (see “Service
Delivery” in the “Process” section). Service delivery to
populations focuses on aggregates of people rather than
on intervention for persons or groups; thus, it is not
relevant to analyze performance skills at the person level
in service delivery to populations.
Client Factors
Client factors are specific capacities, characteristics, or
beliefs that reside within the person, group, or population
and influence performance in occupations (Table 9).
Client factors are affected by the presence or absence of
illness, disease, deprivation, and disability, as well as by
life stages and experiences. These factors can affect
performance skills (e.g., a client may have weakness in
the right arm [a client factor], affecting their ability to
manipulate a button [a motor and process skill] to button
a shirt; a child in a classroom may be nearsighted [a client
factor], affecting their ability to copy from a chalkboard [a
motor and process skill]).
In addition, client factors are affected by occupations,
contexts, performance patterns, and performance skills.
For example, a client in a controlled and calm
environment might be able to problem solve to complete an
occupation or activity, but when they are in a louder, more
chaotic environment, their ability to process and plan may
be adversely affected. It is through this interactive
relationship that occupations and interventions to support
occupations can be used to address client factors and vice
versa.
Values, beliefs, and spirituality influence clients’
motivation to engage in occupations and give their life or
existence meaning. Values are principles, standards, or
qualities considered worthwhile by the client who holds
them. A belief is “something that is accepted, considered
to be true, or held as an opinion” (“Belief,” 2020).
Spirituality is “a deep experience of meaning brought
about by engaging in occupations that involve the
enacting of personal values and beliefs, reflection, and
intention within a supportive contextual environment”
(Billock, 2005, p. 887). It is important to recognize
spirituality “as dynamic and often evolving” (Humbert,
2016, p. 12).
Body functions and body structures refer to the
“physiological function of body systems (including
psychological functions) and anatomical parts of the
body such as organs, limbs, and their components,”
respectively (WHO, 2008, p. 10). Examples of body
functions include sensory, musculoskeletal, mental
(affective, cognitive, perceptual), cardiovascular,
respiratory, and endocrine functions. Examples of body
structures include the heart and blood vessels that
support cardiovascular function. Body structures and
body functions are interrelated, and occupational therapy
practitioners consider them when seeking to promote
clients’ ability to engage in desired occupations.
Occupational therapy practitioners understand that the
presence, absence, or limitation of specific body functions
and body structures does not necessarily determine a
client’s success or difficulty with daily life occupations.
Occupational performance and client factors may benefit
from supports in the physical, social, or attitudinal
contexts that enhance or allow participation. It is through
the process of assessing clients as they engage in
occupations that practitioners are able to determine the
transaction between client factors and performance skills;
to create adaptations, modifications, and remediation; and
to select occupation-based interventions that best
promote enhanced participation.
GUIDELINES
AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT 	15
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p15
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 15 of 87 --

Exhibit 2. Operationalizing the Occupational Therapy Process
Ongoing interaction among evaluation, intervention, and outcomes occurs throughout the occupational therapy process.
Evaluation
Occupational Profile
• Identify the following:
◦ Why is the client seeking services, and what are the client’s current concerns relative to engaging in occupations and in daily
life activities?
◦ In what occupations does the client feel successful, and what barriers are affecting their success in desired occupations?
◦ What is the client’s occupational history (i.e., life experiences)?
◦ What are the client’s values and interests?
◦ What aspects of their contexts (environmental and personal factors) does the client see as supporting engagement in desired
occupations, and what aspects are inhibiting engagement?
◦ How are the client’s performance patterns supporting or limiting occupational performance and engagement?
◦ What are the client’s patterns of engagement in occupations, and how have they changed over time?
◦ What client factors does the client see as supporting engagement in desired occupations, and what aspects are inhibiting
engagement (e.g., pain, active symptoms)?
◦ What are the client’s priorities and desired targeted outcomes related to occupational performance, prevention, health and
wellness, quality of life, participation, role competence, well-being, and occupational justice?
Analysis of Occupational Performance
• The analysis of occupational performance involves one or more of the following:
◦ Synthesizing information from the occupational profile to determine specific occupations and contexts that need to be
addressed
◦ Completing an occupational or activity analysis to identify the demands of occupations and activities on the client
◦ Selecting and using specific assessments to measure the quality of the client’s performance or performance deficits while
completing occupations or activities relevant to desired occupations, noting the effectiveness of performance skills and
performance patterns
◦ Selecting and using specific assessments to measure client factors that influence performance skills and performance patterns
◦ Selecting and administering assessments to identify and measure more specifically the client’s contexts and their impact on
occupational performance.
Synthesis of Evaluation Process
• This synthesis may include the following:
◦ Determining the client’s values and priorities for occupational participation
◦ Interpreting the assessment data to identify supports and hindrances to occupational performance
◦ Developing and refining hypotheses about the client’s occupational performance strengths and deficits
◦ Considering existing support systems and contexts and their ability to support the intervention process
◦ Determining desired outcomes of the intervention
◦ Creating goals in collaboration with the client that address the desired outcomes
◦ Selecting outcome measures and determining procedures to measure progress toward the goals of intervention, which may
include repeating assessments used in the evaluation process.
Intervention
Intervention Plan
• Develop the plan, which involves selecting
◦ Objective and measurable occupation-based goals and related time frames;
◦ Occupational therapy intervention approach or approaches, such as create or promote, establish or restore, maintain, modify,
or prevent; and
◦ Methods for service delivery, including what types of intervention will be provided, who will provide the interventions, and
which service delivery approaches will be used.
• Consider potential discharge needs and plans.
• Make recommendations or referrals to other professionals as needed.
(Continued)
GUIDELINES
16 	AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p16
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 16 of 87 --

Client factors can also be understood as pertaining to
group and population clients and may be used to help
define the group or population. Although client factors
may be described differently when applied to a group or
population, the underlying principles do not change
substantively. Client factors of a group or population are
explored by performing needs assessments, and
interventions might include program development and
strategic planning to help the members engage in
occupations.
Process
This section operationalizes the process undertaken by
occupational therapy practitioners when providing
services to clients. Exhibit 2 summarizes the aspects of
the occupational therapy process.
The occupational therapy process is the client-
centered delivery of occupational therapy services. The
three-part process includes (1) evaluation and (2)
intervention to achieve (3) targeted outcomes and occurs
within the purview of the occupational therapy domain
(Table 10). The process is facilitated by the distinct
perspective of occupational therapy practitioners
engaging in professional reasoning, analyzing
occupations and activities, and collaborating with clients.
The cornerstones of occupational therapy practice
underpin the process of service delivery.
Overview of the Occupational Therapy Process
Many professions use a similar process of evaluating,
intervening, and targeting outcomes. However, only
occupational therapy practitioners focus on the
therapeutic use of occupations to promote health, well-
Exhibit 2. Operationalizing the Occupational Therapy Process (cont’d)
Intervention Implementation
• Select and carry out the intervention or interventions, which may include the following:
◦ Therapeutic use of occupations and activities
◦ Interventions to support occupations
◦ Education
◦ Training
◦ Advocacy
◦ Self-advocacy
◦ Group intervention
◦ Virtual interventions.
• Monitor the client’s response through ongoing evaluation and reevaluation.
Intervention Review
• Reevaluate the plan and how it is implemented relative to achieving outcomes.
• Modify the plan as needed.
• Determine the need for continuation or discontinuation of services and for referral to other services.
Outcomes
Outcomes
• Select outcome measures early in the occupational therapy process (see the “Evaluation” section of this table) on the basis of their
properties:
◦ Valid, reliable, and appropriately sensitive to change in clients’ occupational performance
◦ Consistent with targeted outcomes
◦ Congruent with the client’s goals
◦ Able to predict future outcomes.
• Use outcome measures to measure progress and adjust goals and interventions by
◦ Comparing progress toward goal achievement with outcomes throughout the intervention process and
◦ Assessing outcome use and results to make decisions about the future direction of intervention (e.g., continue, modify,
transition, discontinue, provide follow-up, refer for other service).
GUIDELINES
AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT 	17
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p17
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 17 of 87 --

being, and participation in life. Practitioners use
professional reasoning to select occupations as primary
methods of intervention throughout the process. To help
clients achieve desired outcomes, practitioners facilitate
interactions among the clients, their contexts, and the
occupations in which they engage. This perspective is
based on the theories, knowledge, and skills generated
and used by the profession and informed by available
evidence.
Analyzing occupational performance requires an
understanding of the complex and dynamic interaction
among the demands of the occupation and the client’s
contexts, performance patterns, performance skills,
and client factors. Occupational therapy practitioners
fully consider each aspect of the domain and gauge the
influence of each on the others, individually and
collectively. By understanding how these aspects
influence one another, practitioners can better
evaluate how each aspect contributes to clients’
participation and performance-related concerns and
potentially to interventions that support occupational
performance and participation.
The occupational therapy process is fluid and
dynamic, allowing practitioners and clients to maintain
their focus on the identified outcomes while continually
reflecting on and changing the overall plan to
accommodate new developments and insights along the
way, including information gained from inter- and
intraprofessional collaborations. The process may be
influenced by the context of service delivery (e.g., setting,
payer requirements); however, the primary focus is
always on occupation.
Service Delivery Approaches
Various service delivery approaches are used when
providing skilled occupational therapy services, of
which intra- and interprofessional collaborations are a
key component. It is imperative to communicate with all
relevant providers and stakeholders to ensure a
collaborative approach to the occupational therapy
process. These providers and stakeholders can be
within the profession (e.g., occupational therapist and
occupational therapy assistant collaborating to work
with a student in a school, a group of practitioners
collaborating to develop community-based mental
health programming in their region) or outside the
profession (e.g., a team of rehabilitation and medical
professionals on an inpatient hospital unit; a group of
employees, human resources staff, and health and
safety professionals in a large organization working
with an occupational therapy practitioner on workplace
wellness initiatives).
Regardless of the service delivery approach, the
individual client may not be the exclusive focus of the
occupational therapy process. For example, the needs of
an at-risk infant may be the initial impetus for intervention,
but the concerns and priorities of the parents, extended
family, and funding agencies are also considered.
Occupational therapy practitioners understand and focus
intervention to include the issues and concerns
surrounding the complex dynamics among the client,
caregiver, family, and community. Similarly, services
addressing independent living skills for adults coping
with serious mental illness or chronic health conditions
may also address the needs and expectations of
state and local service agencies and of potential
employers.
Direct Services. Services are provided directly to
clients using a collaborative approach in settings such as
hospitals, clinics, industry, schools, homes, and
communities. Direct services include interventions
completed when in direct contact with the client through
various mechanisms such as meeting in person, leading a
group session, and interacting with clients and families
through telehealth systems (AOTA, 2018c).
Examples of person-level direct service delivery
include working with an adult on an inpatient rehabilitation
unit, working with a child in the classroom while
collaborating with the teacher to address identified goals,
and working with an adolescent in an outpatient setting.
Direct group interventions include working with a cooking
group in a skilled nursing facility, working with an
outpatient feeding group, and working with a handwriting
group in a school. Examples of population-level direct
services include implementing a large-scale healthy
lifestyle or safe driver initiative in the community and
GUIDELINES
18 	AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p18
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 18 of 87 --

delivering a training program for brain injury treatment
facilities regarding safely accessing public transportation.
An occupational therapy approach to population health
focuses on aggregates or communities of people and the
many factors that influence their health and well-being:
“Occupational therapy practitioners develop and
implement occupation-based health approaches to
enhance occupational performance and participation,
[quality of life], and occupational justice for populations”
(AOTA, 2020b, p. 3).
Indirect Services. When providing services to clients
indirectly on their behalf, occupational therapy
practitioners provide consultation to entities such as
teachers, multidisciplinary teams, and community
planning agencies. For example, a practitioner may
consult with a group of elementary school teachers and
administrators about opportunities for play during
recess to promote health and well-being. A practitioner
may also provide consultation on inclusive design to a
park district or civic organization to address how the
built and natural environments can support occupa-
tional performance and engagement. In addition, a
practitioner may consult with a business regarding the
work environment, ergonomic modifications, and
compliance with the Americans With Disabilities Act of
1990 (Pub. L. 101-336).
Occupational therapy practitioners can advocate
indirectly on behalf of their clients at the person, group,
and population levels to ensure their occupational
needs are met. For example, an occupational therapy
practitioner may advocate for funding to support the
costs of training a service animal for an individual
client. A practitioner working with a group client may
advocate for meeting space in the community for a peer
support group of transgender youth. Examples of
population-level advocacy include talking with
legislators about improving transportation for older
adults, developing services for people with disabilities
to support their living and working in the community of
their choice, establishing meaningful civic engagement
opportunities for underserved youth, and assisting in
the development of policies that address inequities in
access to health care.
Additional Approaches. Occupational therapy
practitioners use additional approaches that may also be
classified as direct or indirect for persons, groups, and
populations. Examples include, but are not limited to,
case management (AOTA, 2018b), telehealth (AOTA,
2018c), episodic care (Centers for Medicare & Medicaid
Services, 2019), and family-centered care approaches
(Hanna & Rodger, 2002).
Practice Within Organizations and Systems
Organization- or systems-level practice is a valid and
important part of occupational therapy for several reasons.
First, organizations serve as a mechanism through which
occupational therapy practitioners provide interventions
to support participation of people who are members of or
served by the organization (e.g., falls prevention
programming in a skilled nursing facility, ergonomic
changes to an assembly line to reduce musculoskeletal
disorders). Second, organizations support occupational
therapy practice and practitioners as stakeholders in
carrying out the mission of the organization. Practitioners
have the responsibility to ensure that services provided
to organizational stakeholders (e.g., third-party payers,
employers) are of high quality and delivered in an ethical,
efficient, and efficacious manner.
Finally, organizations employ occupational therapy
practitioners in roles in which they use their knowledge of
occupation and the profession of occupational therapy
indirectly. For example, practitioners can serve in
positions such as dean, administrator, and corporate
leader (e.g., CEO, business owner). In these positions,
practitioners support and enhance the organization but
do not provide occupational therapy services in the
traditional sense. Occupational therapy practitioners can
also serve organizations in roles such as client advocate,
program coordinator, transition manager, service or care
coordinator, health and wellness coach, and community
integration specialist.
Occupational and Activity Analysis
Occupational therapy practitioners are skilled in the
analysis of occupations and activities and apply this
important skill throughout the occupational therapy
GUIDELINES
AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT 	19
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p19
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 19 of 87 --

process. Occupational analysis is performed with an
understanding of “the specific situation of the client and
therefore . . . the specific occupations the client wants or
needs to do in the actual context in which these
occupations are performed” (Schell et al., 2019, p. 322). In
contrast, activity analysis is generic and
decontextualized in its purpose and serves to develop an
understanding of typical activity demands within a given
culture. Many professions use activity analysis, whereas
occupational analysis requires the understanding of
occupation as distinct from activity and brings an
occupational therapy perspective to the analysis process
(Schell et al., 2019).
Occupational therapy practitioners analyze the
demands of an occupation or activity to understand the
performance patterns, performance skills, and client
factors that are required to perform it (Table 11).
Depending on the purpose of the analysis, the meaning
ascribed to and the contexts for performance of and
engagement in the occupation or activity are considered
either from a client-specific subjective perspective
(occupational analysis) or a general perspective within a
given culture (activity analysis).
Therapeutic Use of Self
An integral part of the occupational therapy process is
therapeutic use of self, in which occupational therapy
practitioners develop and manage their therapeutic
relationship with clients by using professional
reasoning, empathy, and a client-centered, collaborative
approach to service delivery (Taylor & Van
Puymbrouck, 2013). Occupational therapy practitioners
use professional reasoning to help clients make sense of
the information they are receiving in the intervention
process, discover meaning, and build hope (Taylor,
2019; Taylor & Van Puymbrouck, 2013). Empathy is the
emotional exchange between occupational therapy
practitioners and clients that allows more open
communication, ensuring that practitioners connect with
clients at an emotional level to assist them with their
current life situation.
Practitioners develop a collaborative relationship with
clients to understand their experiences and desires for
intervention. The collaborative approach used
throughout the process honors the contributions of
clients along with practitioners. Through the use of
interpersonal communication skills, practitioners shift
the power of the relationship to allow clients more
control in decision making and problem solving, which is
essential to effective intervention. Clients have
identified the therapeutic relationship as critical to the
outcome of occupational therapy intervention (Cole &
McLean, 2003).
Clients bring to the occupational therapy process
their knowledge about their life experiences and their
hopes and dreams for the future. They identify and
share their needs and priorities. Occupational therapy
practitioners must create an inclusive, supportive
environment to enable clients to feel safe in expressing
themselves authentically. To build an inclusive
environment, practitioners can take actions such as
pursuing education on gender-affirming care,
acknowledging systemic issues affecting
underrepresented groups, and using a lens of cultural
humility throughout the occupational therapy process
(AOTA, 2020c; Hammell, 2013).
Occupational therapy practitioners bring to the
therapeutic relationship their knowledge about how
engagement in occupation affects health, well-being,
and participation; they use this information, coupled
with theoretical perspectives and professional
reasoning, to critically evaluate, analyze, describe,
and interpret human performance. Practitioners and
clients, together with caregivers, family members,
community members, and other stakeholders (as
appropriate), identify and prioritize the focus of the
intervention plan.
Clinical and Professional Reasoning
Throughout the occupational therapy process,
practitioners are continually engaged in clinical and
professional reasoning about a client’s occupational
performance. The term professional reasoning is used
throughout this document as a broad term to encompass
reasoning that occurs in all settings (Schell, 2019).
Professional reasoning enables practitioners to
GUIDELINES
20 	AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p20
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 20 of 87 --

n Identify the multiple demands, required skills, and
potential meanings of the activities and occupations
and
n Gain a deeper understanding of the interrelationships
among aspects of the domain that affect performance
and that support client-centered interventions and
outcomes.
Occupational therapy practitioners use theoretical
principles and models, knowledge about the effects of
conditions on participation, and available evidence on
the effectiveness of interventions to guide their reasoning.
Professional reasoning ensures the accurate selection
and application of client-centered evaluation methods,
interventions, and outcome measures. Practitioners also
apply their knowledge and skills to enhance clients’
participation in occupations and promote their health and
well-being regardless of the effects of disease, disability,
and occupational disruption or deprivation.
Evaluation
The evaluation process is focused on finding out what
the client wants and needs to do; determining what the
client can do and has done; and identifying supports and
barriers to health, well-being, and participation. Evaluation
occurs during the initial and all subsequent interactions
with a client. The type and focus of the evaluation differ
depending on the practice setting; however, all evaluations
should assess the complex and multifaceted needs of each
client.
The evaluation consists of the occupational profile and
the analysis of occupational performance, which are
synthesized to inform the intervention plan (Hinojosa
et al., 2014). Although it is the responsibility of the
occupational therapist to initiate the evaluation process,
both occupational therapists and occupational therapy
assistants may contribute to the evaluation, following
which the occupational therapist completes the analysis
and synthesis of information for the development of the
intervention plan (AOTA, 2020a). The occupational
profile includes information about the client’s needs,
problems, and concerns about performance in
occupations. The analysis of occupational performance
focuses on collecting and interpreting information
specifically to identify supports and barriers related to
occupational performance and establish targeted
outcomes.
Although the OTPF–4 describes the components of the
evaluation process separately and sequentially, the exact
manner in which occupational therapy practitioners
collect client information is influenced by client needs,
practice settings, and frames of reference or practice
models. The evaluation process for groups and
populations mirrors that for individual clients.
In some settings, the occupational therapist first
completes a screening or consultation to determine the
appropriateness of a full occupational therapy evaluation
(Hinojosa et al., 2014). This process may include
n Review of client history (e.g., medical, health, social,
or academic records),
n Consultation with an interprofessional or referring
team, and
n Use of standardized or structured screening
instruments.
The screening or consultation process may result in
the development of a brief occupational profile and
recommendations for full occupational therapy
evaluation and intervention (Hinojosa et al., 2014).
Occupational Profile
The occupational profile is a summary of a client’s
(person’s, group’s, or population’s) occupational history
and experiences, patterns of daily living, interests,
values, needs, and relevant contexts (AOTA, 2017a).
Developing the occupational profile provides the
occupational therapy practitioner with an understanding
of the client’s perspective and background.
Using a client-centered approach, the occupational
therapy practitioner gathers information to understand what
is currently important and meaningful to the client (i.e., what
the client wants and needs to do) and to identify past
experiences and interests that may assist in the
understanding of current issues and problems. During the
process of collecting this information, the client, with the
assistance of the practitioner, identifies priorities and desired
GUIDELINES
AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT 	21
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p21
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 21 of 87 --

targeted outcomes that will lead to the client’s engagement
in occupations that support participation in daily life. Only
clients can identify the occupations that give meaning to their
lives and select the goals and priorities that are important to
them. By valuing and respecting clients’ input, practitioners
help foster their involvement and can more effectively guide
interventions.
Occupational therapy practitioners collect information
for the occupational profile at the beginning of contact with
clients to establish client-centered outcomes. Over time,
practitioners collect additional information, refine the
profile, and ensure that the additional information is
reflected in changes subsequently made to targeted
outcomes. The process of completing and refining the
occupational profile varies by setting and client and may
occur continuously throughout the occupational therapy
process.
Information gathering for the occupational profile may
be completed in one session or over a longer period while
working with the client. For clients who are unable to
participate in this process, their profile may be compiled
through interaction with family members or other significant
people in their lives. Information for the occupational
profile may also be gathered from available and relevant
records.
Obtaining information for the occupational profile
through both formal and informal interview techniques and
conversation is a way to establish a therapeutic
relationship with clients and their support network.
Techniques used should be appropriate and reflective of
clients’ preferred method and style of communication
(e.g., use of a communication board, translation
services). Practitioners may use AOTA’s Occupational
Profile Template as a guide to completing the
occupational profile (AOTA, 2017a). The information
obtained through the occupational profile contributes to an
individualized approach in the evaluation, intervention
planning, and intervention implementation stages.
Information is collected in the following areas:
n Why is the client seeking services, and what are the
client’s current concerns relative to engaging in
occupations and in daily life activities?
n In what occupations does the client feel successful,
and what barriers are affecting their success in
desired occupations?
n What is the client’s occupational history (i.e., life
experiences)?
n What are the client’s values and interests?
n What aspects of their contexts (environmental and
personal factors) does the client see as supporting
engagement in desired occupations, and what
aspects are inhibiting engagement?
n How are the client’s performance patterns supporting
or limiting occupational performance and
engagement?
n What are the client’s patterns of engagement in
occupations, and how have they changed over time?
n What client factors does the client see as supporting
engagement in desired occupations, and what aspects
are inhibiting engagement (e.g., pain, active
symptoms)?
n What are the client’s priorities and desired targeted
outcomes related to occupational performance,
prevention, health and wellness, quality of life,
participation, role competence, well-being, and
occupational justice?
After the practitioner collects profile data, the
occupational therapist views the information and develops
a working hypothesis regarding possible reasons for the
identified problems and concerns. Reasons could include
impairments in performance skills, performance patterns,
or client factors or barriers within relevant contexts. In
addition, the therapist notes the client’s strengths and
supports in all areas because these can inform the
intervention plan and affect targeted outcomes.
Analysis of Occupational Performance
Occupational performance is the accomplishment of the
selected occupation resulting from the dynamic transaction
among the client, their contexts, and the occupation. In the
analysis of occupational performance, the practitioner
identifies the client’s ability to effectively complete desired
occupations. The client’s assets and limitations or potential
problems are more specifically determined through
GUIDELINES
22 	AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p22
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 22 of 87 --

assessment tools designed to analyze, measure, and inquire
about factors that support or hinder occupational
performance.
Multiple methods often are used during the evaluation
process to assess the client, contexts, occupations, and
occupational performance. Methods may include
observation and analysis of the client’s performance of
specific occupations and assessment of specific aspects
of the client or their performance. The approach to the
analysis of occupational performance is determined by
the information gathered through the occupational profile
and influenced by models of practice and frames of
reference appropriate to the client and setting. The
analysis of occupational performance involves one or
more of the following:
n Synthesizing information from the occupational
profile to determine specific occupations and
contexts that need to be addressed
n Completing an occupational or activity analysis to
identify the demands of occupations and activities on
the client
n Selecting and using specific assessments to
measure the quality of the client’s performance or
performance deficits while completing occupations or
activities relevant to desired occupations, noting the
effectiveness of performance skills and performance
patterns
n Selecting and using specific assessments to
measure client factors that influence performance
skills and performance patterns
n Selecting and administering assessments to identify
and measure more specifically the client’s contexts
and their impact on occupational performance.
Occupational performance may be measured through
standardized, formal, and structured assessment tools, and
when necessary informal approaches may also be used
(Asher, 2014). Standardized assessments are preferred,
when available, to provide objective data about various
aspects of the domain influencing engagement and
performance. The use of valid and reliable assessments
for obtaining trustworthy information can also help support
and justify the need for occupational therapy services
(Doucet & Gutman, 2013; Hinojosa & Kramer, 2014). In
addition, the use of standardized outcome performance
measures and outcome tools assists in establishing a
baseline of occupational performance to allow for objective
measurement of progress after intervention.
Synthesis of the Evaluation Process
The occupational therapist synthesizes the information
gathered through the occupational profile and analysis of
occupational performance. This process may include the
following:
n Determining the client’s values and priorities for
occupational participation
n Interpreting the assessment data to identify supports
and hindrances to occupational performance
n Developing and refining hypotheses about the
client’s occupational performance strengths and
deficits
n Considering existing support systems and contexts
and their ability to support the intervention process
n Determining desired outcomes of the intervention
n Creating goals in collaboration with the client that
address the desired outcomes
n Selecting outcome measures and determining
procedures to measure progress toward the goals of
intervention, which may include repeating
assessments used in the evaluation process.
Any outcome assessment used by occupational
therapy practitioners must be consistent with clients’
belief systems and underlying assumptions regarding
their desired occupational performance. Occupational
therapy practitioners select outcome assessments
pertinent to clients’ needs and goals, congruent with
the practitioner’s theoretical model of practice.
Assessment selection is also based on the practitioner’s
knowledge of and available evidence for the
psychometric properties of standardized measures or the
rationale and protocols for nonstandardized structured
measures. In addition, clients’ perception of success in
engaging in desired occupations is a vital part of outcome
assessment (Bandura, 1986). The occupational therapist
uses the synthesis and summary of information from the
GUIDELINES
AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT 	23
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p23
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 23 of 87 --

evaluation and established targeted outcomes to guide the
intervention process.
Intervention
The intervention process consists of services provided by
occupational therapy practitioners in collaboration with
clients to facilitate engagement in occupation related to
health, well-being, and achievement of established goals
consistent with the various service delivery models.
Practitioners use the information about clients gathered
during the evaluation and theoretical principles to select
and provide occupation-based interventions to assist
clients in achieving physical, mental, and social well-
being; identifying and realizing aspirations; satisfying
needs; and changing or coping with contextual factors.
Types of occupational therapy interventions are
categorized as occupations and activities, interventions to
support occupations, education and training, advocacy,
group interventions, and virtual interventions (Table 12).
Approaches to intervention include create or promote,
establish or restore, maintain, modify, and prevent
(Table 13). Across all types of and approaches to
interventions, it is imperative that occupational therapy
practitioners maintain an understanding of the
Occupational Therapy Code of Ethics (AOTA, 2015a)
and the Standards of Practice for Occupational Therapy
(AOTA, 2015c).
Intervention is intended to promote health, well-being,
and participation. Health promotion is “the process of
enabling people to increase control over, and to improve,
their health” (WHO, 1986). Wilcock (2006) stated,
Following an occupation-based health promotion approach to well-being
embraces a belief that the potential range of what people can do, be, and
strive to become is the primary concern, and that health is a by-product.
A varied and full occupational lifestyle will coincidentally maintain and
improve health and well-being if it enables people to be creative and
adventurous physically, mentally, and socially. (p. 315)
Interventions vary depending on the client—person,
group, or population—and the context of service delivery.
The actual term used for clients or groups of clients
receiving occupational therapy varies among practice
settings and delivery models. For example, when
working in a hospital, the person or group might be
referred to as a patient or patients, and in a school, the
clients might be students. Early intervention requires
practitioners to work with the family system as their
clients. When practitioners provide consultation to an
organization, clients may be called consumers or
members. Terms used for others who may help or be
served indirectly include, but are not limited to,
caregiver, teacher, parent, employer, or spouse.
Intervention can also be in the form of collective
services to groups and populations. Such intervention
can occur as direct service provision or consultation.
When consulting with an organization, occupational
therapy practitioners may use strategic planning, change
agent plans, and other program development
approaches. Practitioners addressing the needs of a
population direct their interventions toward current or
potential diseases or conditions with the goal of
enhancing the health, well-being, and participation of all
members collectively. With groups and populations, the
intervention focus is often on health promotion,
prevention, and screening. Interventions may include
(but are not limited to) self-management training,
educational services, and environmental modification. For
instance, occupational therapy practitioners may provide
education on falls prevention and the impact of fear of
falling to residents in an assisted living center or training to
people facing a mental health challenge in use of the
internet to identify and coordinate community resources
that meet their needs.
Occupational therapy practitioners work with a
wide variety of populations experiencing difficulty in
accessing and engaging in healthy occupations because
of factors such as poverty, homelessness, displacement,
and discrimination. For example, practitioners can
work with organizations providing services to
refugees and asylum seekers to identify opportunities to
reestablish occupational roles and enhance well-being and
quality of life.
The intervention process is divided into three
components: (1) intervention plan, (2) intervention
implementation, and (3) intervention review. During the
intervention process, the occupational therapy practitioner
integrates information from the evaluation with theory,
GUIDELINES
24 	AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p24
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 24 of 87 --

practice models, frames of reference, and research
evidence on interventions, including those that support
occupations. This information guides the practitioner’s
professional reasoning in intervention planning,
implementation, and review. Because evaluation is
ongoing, revision may occur at any point during the
intervention process.
Intervention Plan
The intervention plan, which directs the actions of
occupational therapy practitioners, describes the
occupational therapy approaches and types of
interventions selected for use in reaching clients’ targeted
outcomes. The intervention plan is developed
collaboratively with clients or their proxies and is directed
by
n Client goals, values, beliefs, and occupational needs
and
n Client health and well-being,
as well as by the practitioners’ evaluation of
n Client occupational performance needs;
n Collective influence of the contexts, occupational or
activity demands, and client factors on the client;
n Client performance skills and performance
patterns;
n Context of service delivery in which the intervention is
provided; and
n Best available evidence.
The occupational therapist designs the intervention
plan on the basis of established treatment goals,
addressing the client’s current and potential situation
related to engagement in occupations or activities. The
intervention plan should reflect the priorities of the client,
information on occupational performance gathered
through the evaluation process, and targeted outcomes
of the intervention. Intervention planning includes the
following steps:
1. Developing the plan, which involves selecting
+ Objective and measurable occupation-based goals
and related time frames;
+ Occupational therapy intervention approach or
approaches; and
+ Methods for service delivery, including what types of
interventions will be provided, who will provide the
interventions, and which service delivery
approaches will be used;
2. Considering potential discharge needs and plans; and
3. Making recommendations or referrals to other
professionals as needed.
Steps 2 and 3 are discussed in the Outcomes section.
Intervention Implementation
Intervention implementation is the process of putting
the intervention plan into action and occurs after the
initial evaluation process and development of the
intervention plan. Interventions may focus on a single
aspect of the occupational therapy domain, such as a
specific occupation, or on several aspects of the
domain, such as contexts, performance patterns, and
performance skills, as components of one or more
occupations. Intervention implementation must always
reflect the occupational therapy scope of practice;
occupational practitioners should not perform
interventions that do not use purposeful and
occupation-based approaches (Gillen et al., 2019).
Intervention implementation includes the following
steps (see Table 12):
n Select and carry out the intervention or
interventions, which may include the following:
+ Therapeutic use of occupations and activities
+ Interventions to support occupations
+ Education
+ Training
+ Advocacy
+ Self-advocacy
+ Group intervention
+ Virtual interventions.
n Monitor the client’s response through ongoing
evaluation and reevaluation.
GUIDELINES
AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT 	25
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p25
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 25 of 87 --

Given that aspects of the domain are interrelated and
influence one another in a continuous, dynamic process,
occupational therapy practitioners expect that a client’s
ability to adapt, change, and develop in one area will
affect other areas. Because of this dynamic
interrelationship, evaluation, including analysis of
occupational performance, and intervention planning
continue throughout the implementation process. In
addition, intervention implementation includes
monitoring of the client’s response to specific
interventions and progress toward goals.
Intervention Review
Intervention review is the continuous process of
reevaluating and reviewing the intervention plan, the
effectiveness of its delivery, and progress toward
outcomes. As during intervention planning, this
process includes collaboration with the client to identify
progress toward goals and outcomes. Reevaluation
and review may lead to change in the intervention plan.
Practitioners should review best practices for using process
indicators and, as appropriate, modify the intervention plan
and monitor progress using outcome performance
measures and outcome tools. Intervention review includes
the following steps:
1. Reevaluating the plan and how it is implemented
relative to achieving outcomes
2. Modifying the plan as needed
3. Determining the need for continuation or
discontinuation of occupational therapy services and
for referral to other services.
Outcomes
Outcomes emerge from the occupational therapy
process and describe the results clients can achieve
through occupational therapy intervention (Table 14).
The outcomes of occupational therapy are
multifaceted and may occur in all aspects of the domain
of concern. Outcomes should be measured with the
same methods used at evaluation and determined
through comparison of the client’s status at evaluation
with the client’s status at discharge or transition.
Results of occupational therapy services are
established using outcome performance measures and
outcome tools.
Outcomes are directly related to the interventions
provided and to the targeted occupations, performance
patterns, performance skills, client factors, and
contexts. Outcomes may be traced to improvement in
areas of the domain, such as performance skills and
client factors, but should ultimately be reflected in
clients’ ability to engage in their desired occupations.
Outcomes targeted in occupational therapy can be
summarized as
n Occupational performance,
n Prevention,
n Health and wellness,
n Quality of life,
n Participation,
n Role competence,
n Well-being, and
n Occupational justice.
Occupational adaptation, or the client’s effective and
efficient response to occupational and contextual
demands (Grajo, 2019), is interwoven through all of
these outcomes.
The impact of outcomes and the way they are defined
are specific to clients (persons, groups, or populations)
and to other stakeholders such as payers and regulators.
Outcomes and their documentation vary by practice
setting and are influenced by the stakeholders in each
setting (AOTA, 2018a).
The focus on outcomes is woven throughout the
process of occupational therapy. During evaluation,
occupational therapy practitioners and clients (and often
others, such as parents and caregivers) collaborate to
identify targeted outcomes related to engagement in valued
occupations or daily life activities. These outcomes are the
basis for development of the intervention plan. During
intervention implementation and review, clients and
practitioners may modify targeted outcomes to
accommodate changing needs, contexts, and
performance abilities. Ultimately, the intervention process
should result in the achievement of outcomes related to
GUIDELINES
26 	AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p26
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 26 of 87 --

health, well-being, and participation in life through
engagement in occupation.
Outcome Measurement
Objective outcomes are measurable and tangible
aspects of improved performance. Outcome
measurement is sometimes derived from standardized
assessments, with results reflected in numerical data
following specific scoring instructions. These data quantify
a client’s response to intervention in a way that can be
used by all relevant stakeholders. Objective outcome
measures are selected early in the occupational therapy
process on the basis of properties showing that they are
n Valid, reliable, and appropriately sensitive to change
in the client’s occupational performance,
n Consistent with targeted outcomes,
n Congruent with the client’s goals, and
n Able to predict future outcomes.
Practitioners use objective outcome measures to
measure progress and adjust goals and interventions by
n Comparing progress toward goal achievement with
outcomes throughout the intervention process and
n Measuring and assessing results to make decisions
about the future direction of intervention (e.g.,
continue, modify, transition, discontinue, provide
follow-up, refer for other service).
In some settings, the focus is on patient-reported
outcomes (PROs), which have been defined as “any
report of the status of a patient’s health condition that
comes directly from the patient, without interpretation of
the patient’s response by a clinician or anyone else”
(National Quality Forum, n.d., para. 1). PROs can be
used as subjective measures of improved outlook,
confidence, hope, playfulness, self-efficacy, sustainability
of valued occupations, pain reduction, resilience, and
perceived well-being. An example of a PRO is parents’
greater perceived efficacy in parenting through a new
understanding of their child’s behavior (Cohn, 2001;
Cohn et al., 2000; Graham et al., 2013). Another example
is a report by an outpatient client with a hand injury of a
reduction in pain during the IADL of doing laundry. “PRO
tools measure what patients are able to do and how they
feel by asking questions. These tools enable assessment
of patient-reported health status for physical, mental, and
social well-being” (National Quality Forum, n.d., para. 1).
Outcomes can also be designed for caregivers—for
example, improved quality of life for both care recipient
and caregiver. Studies of caregivers of people with
dementia who received a home environmental
intervention found fewer declines in occupational
performance, enhanced mastery and skill, improved
sense of self-efficacy and well-being, and less need for
help with care recipients (Gitlin & Corcoran, 2005; Gitlin
et al., 2001, 2003, 2008; Graff et al., 2007; Piersol et al.,
2017).
Outcomes for groups that receive an educational
intervention may include improved social interaction,
increased self-awareness through peer support, a larger
social network, or improved employee health and
productivity. For example, education interventions for
groups of employees on safety and workplace wellness
have been shown to decrease work injuries and increase
workplace productivity and satisfaction (Snodgrass & Amini,
2017).
Outcomes for populations may address health
promotion, occupational justice and self-advocacy, health
literacy, community integration, community living, and
access to services. As with other occupational therapy
clients, outcomes for populations are focused on
occupational performance, engagement, and participation.
For example, outcomes at the population level as a result of
advocacy interventions include construction of accessible
playground facilities, improved accessibility for polling
places, and reconstruction of a school after a natural
disaster.
Transition and Discontinuation
Transition is movement from one life role or experience to
another. Transitions in services, like all life transitions,
may require preparation, new knowledge, and time to
accommodate to the new situation (Orentlicher et al.,
2015). Transition planning may be needed, for example,
when a client moves from one setting to another along
the care continuum (e.g., acute hospital to skilled nursing
GUIDELINES
AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT 	27
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p27
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 27 of 87 --

facility) or ages out of one program and into a new one
(e.g., early intervention to elementary school).
Collaboration among practitioners is necessary to ensure
safety, well-being, and optimal outcomes for clients (Joint
Commission, 2012, 2013).
Transition planning may include a referral to a provider
within occupational therapy with advanced knowledge
and skill (e.g., vestibular rehabilitation, driver evaluation,
hand therapy) or outside the profession (e.g.,
psychologist, optometrist). Transition planning for groups
and populations may be needed for a transition from one
stage to another (e.g., middle school students in a life
skills program who transition to high school) or from one
set of needs to another (e.g., older adults in a community
falls prevention program who transition to a community
exercise program).
Planning for discontinuation of occupational
therapy services begins at initial evaluation.
Discontinuation of care occurs when the client ends
services after meeting short- and long-term goals or
chooses to discontinue receiving services (consistent
with client-centered care). Safe and effective
discharge planning for a person may include
education on the use of new equipment, adaptation of
an occupation, caregiver training, environmental
modification, or determination of the appropriate
setting for transition of care. A key goal of discharge
planning for individual clients is prevention of
readmission (Rogers et al., 2017). Discontinuation of
services for groups and populations occurs when goals
are met and sustainability plans are implemented for
long-term success.
Conclusion
The OTPF–4 describes the central concepts that ground
occupational therapy practice and builds a common
understanding of the basic tenets and distinct
contribution of the profession. The occupational therapy
domain and process are linked inextricably in a
transactional relationship. An understanding of this
relationship supports and guides the complex decision
making required in the daily practice of occupational
therapy and enhances practitioners’ ability to
define the reasons for and justify the provision of
services when communicating with clients, family
members, team members, employers, payers, and
policymakers.
This edition of the OTPF provides a broader view than
previous editions of occupational therapy as related to
groups and populations and current and future
occupational needs of clients. It also presents and
describes the cornerstones of occupational therapy practice,
which are discrete and critical qualities of occupational
therapy practitioners that provide them with a foundation for
success in the occupational therapy process. The OTPF–4
highlights the distinct value of occupation and occupational
therapy in contributing to health, well-being, and participation
in life for persons, groups, and populations. This document
can be used to advocate for the importance of occupational
therapy in meeting society’s current and future needs,
ultimately advancing the profession to ensure a sustainable
future.
GUIDELINES
28 	AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p28
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 28 of 87 --

Table 1. Examples of Clients: Persons, Groups, and Populations
Person 	Group 	Population
Health Management
Middle-school student with diabetes in-
terested in developing self-management
skills to test blood sugar levels
Group of students with diabetes interested
in problem solving the school setting’s
support for management of their condition
All students in the school provided with
access to food choices to meet varying
dietary needs and desires
Feeding
Family of an infant with a history of pre-
maturity and difficulty accepting nutrition
orally
Families with infants experiencing feeding
challenges advocating for the local hos-
pital’s rehabilitation services to develop
infant feeding classes
Families of infants advocating for re-
search and development of alternative
nipple and bottle designs to address
feeding challenges
Community Mobility
Person with stroke who wants to return to
driving
Stroke support group talking with elected
leaders about developing community
mobility resources
Stroke survivors advocating for increased
access to community mobility options for
all persons living with mobility limitations
Social Participation
Young adult with IDD interested in in-
creasing social participation
Young adults with IDD in a transition
program sponsoring leisure activities in
which all may participate in valued social
relationships
Young adults with IDD educating their
community about their need for inclusion
in community-based social and leisure
activities
Home Establishment and Management
Person living with SMI interested in de-
veloping skills for independent living
Support group for people living with SMI
developing resources to foster indepen-
dent living
People living with SMI in the same region
advocating for increased housing options
for independent living
Work Participation
Older worker with difficulty performing
some work tasks
Group of older workers in a factory ad-
vocating for modification of equipment to
address discomfort when operating the
same set of machines
Older workers in a national corporation
advocating for company-wide wellness
support programs
Note. IDD = intellectual and developmental disabilities; SMI = serious mental illness.
GUIDELINES
AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT 	29
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p29
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 29 of 87 --

Table 2. Occupations
Occupations are “the everyday activities that people do as individuals, in families, and with communities to occupy time and bring
meaning and purpose to life. Occupations include things people need to, want to and are expected to do” (World Federation of
Occupational Therapists, 2012a, para. 2). Occupations are categorized as activities of daily living, instrumental activities of daily living,
health management, rest and sleep, education, work, play, leisure, and social participation.
Occupation 	Description
Activities of Daily Living (ADLs)—Activities oriented toward taking care of one’s own body and completed on a routine basis
(adapted from Rogers & Holm, 1994).
Bathing, showering 	Obtaining and using supplies; soaping, rinsing, and drying body
parts; maintaining bathing position; transferring to and from
bathing positions
Toileting and toilet hygiene 	Obtaining and using toileting supplies, managing clothing,
maintaining toileting position, transferring to and from toileting
position, cleaning body, caring for menstrual and continence
needs (including catheter, colostomy, and suppository man-
agement), maintaining intentional control of bowel movements
and urination and, if necessary, using equipment or agents
for bladder control (Uniform Data System for Medical
Rehabilitation, 1996, pp. III-20, III-24)
Dressing 	Selecting clothing and accessories with consideration of time of
day, weather, and desired presentation; obtaining clothing from
storage area; dressing and undressing in a sequential fashion;
fastening and adjusting clothing and shoes; applying and re-
moving personal devices, prosthetic devices, or splints
Eating and swallowing 	Keeping and manipulating food or fluid in the mouth, swal-
lowing it (i.e., moving it from the mouth to the stomach)
Feeding 	Setting up, arranging, and bringing food or fluid from the vessel
to the mouth (includes self-feeding and feeding others)
Functional mobility 	Moving from one position or place to another (during perfor-
mance of everyday activities), such as in-bed mobility, wheel-
chair mobility, and transfers (e.g., wheelchair, bed, car, shower,
tub, toilet, chair, floor); includes functional ambulation and
transportation of objects
Personal hygiene and grooming 	Obtaining and using supplies; removing body hair (e.g., using a
razor or tweezers); applying and removing cosmetics; washing,
drying, combing, styling, brushing, and trimming hair; caring
for nails (hands and feet); caring for skin, ears, eyes, and nose;
applying deodorant; cleaning mouth; brushing and flossing
teeth; removing, cleaning, and reinserting dental orthotics and
prosthetics
Sexual activity 	Engaging in the broad possibilities for sexual expression and
experiences with self or others (e.g., hugging, kissing, foreplay,
masturbation, oral sex, intercourse)
Instrumental Activities of Daily Living (IADLs)—Activities to support daily life within the home and community.
Care of others (including selection and supervision of caregivers) Providing care for others, arranging or supervising formal care
(by paid caregivers) or informal care (by family or friends) for
others
(Continued)
GUIDELINES
30 	AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p30
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 30 of 87 --

Table 2. Occupations (cont’d)
Occupation 	Description
Care of pets and animals 	Providing care for pets and service animals, arranging or su-
pervising care for pets and service animals
Child rearing 	Providing care and supervision to support the developmental
and physiological needs of a child
Communication management 	Sending, receiving, and interpreting information using systems
and equipment such as writing tools, telephones (including
smartphones), keyboards, audiovisual recorders, computers or
tablets, communication boards, call lights, emergency systems,
Braille writers, telecommunication devices for deaf people,
augmentative communication systems, and personal digital
assistants
Driving and community mobility 	Planning and moving around in the community using public or
private transportation, such as driving, walking, bicycling, or
accessing and riding in buses, taxi cabs, ride shares, or other
transportation systems
Financial management 	Using fiscal resources, including financial transaction methods
(e.g., credit card, digital banking); planning and using finances
with long-term and short-term goals
Home establishment and management 	Obtaining and maintaining personal and household possessions
and environments (e.g., home, yard, garden, houseplants,
appliances, vehicles), including maintaining and repairing
personal possessions (e.g., clothing, household items) and
knowing how to seek help or whom to contact
Meal preparation and cleanup 	Planning, preparing, and serving meals and cleaning up food
and tools (e.g., utensils, pots, plates) after meals
Religious and spiritual expression 	Engaging in religious or spiritual activities, organizations, and
practices for self-fulfillment; finding meaning or religious or
spiritual value; establishing connection with a divine power,
such as is involved in attending a church, temple, mosque, or
synagogue; praying or chanting for a religious purpose; en-
gaging in spiritual contemplation (World Health Organization,
2008); may also include giving back to others, contributing to
society or a cause, and contributing to a greater purpose
Safety and emergency maintenance 	Evaluating situations in advance for potential safety risks;
recognizing sudden, unexpected hazardous situations and ini-
tiating emergency action; reducing potential threats to health
and safety, including ensuring safety when entering and exiting
the home, identifying emergency contact numbers, and
replacing items such as batteries in smoke alarms and light
bulbs
Shopping 	Preparing shopping lists (grocery and other); selecting, pur-
chasing, and transporting items; selecting method of payment
and completing payment transactions; managing internet
shopping and related use of electronic devices such as com-
puters, cell phones, and tablets
(Continued)
GUIDELINES
AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT 	31
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p31
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 31 of 87 --

Table 2. Occupations (cont’d)
Occupation 	Description
Health Management—Activities related to developing, managing, and maintaining health and wellness routines, including
self-management, with the goal of improving or maintaining health to support participation in other occupations.
Social and emotional health promotion and maintenance 	Identifying personal strengths and assets, managing emotions,
expressing needs effectively, seeking occupations and social
engagement to support health and wellness, developing self-
identity, making choices to improve quality of life in participation
Symptom and condition management 	Managing physical and mental health needs, including using
coping strategies for illness, trauma history, or societal stigma;
managing pain; managing chronic disease; recognizing
symptom changes and fluctuations; developing and using
strategies for managing and regulating emotions; planning time
and establishing behavioral patterns for restorative activities
(e.g., meditation); using community and social supports;
navigating and accessing the health care system
Communication with the health care system 	Expressing and receiving verbal, written, and digital commu-
nication with health care and insurance providers, including
understanding and advocating for self or others
Medication management 	Communicating with the physician about prescriptions, filling
prescriptions at the pharmacy, interpreting medication in-
structions, taking medications on a routine basis, refilling
prescriptions in a timely manner (American Occupational
Therapy Association, 2017c; Schwartz & Smith, 2017)
Physical activity 	Completing cardiovascular exercise, strength training, and
balance training to improve or maintain health and decrease risk
of health episodes, such as by incorporating walks into daily
routine
Nutrition management 	Implementing and adhering to nutrition and hydration recom-
mendations from the medical team, preparing meals to support
health goals, participating in health-promoting diet routines
Personal care device management 	Procuring, using, cleaning, and maintaining personal care de-
vices, including hearing aids, contact lenses, glasses, orthotics,
prosthetics, adaptive equipment, pessaries, glucometers, and
contraceptive and sexual devices
Rest and Sleep—Activities related to obtaining restorative rest and sleep to support healthy, active engagement in other
occupations.
Rest 	Identifying the need to relax and engaging in quiet and effortless
actions that interrupt physical and mental activity (Nurit &
Michal, 2003, p. 227); reducing involvement in taxing physical,
mental, or social activities, resulting in a relaxed state; engaging
in relaxation or other endeavors that restore energy and calm
and renew interest in engagement
Sleep preparation 	Engaging in routines that prepare the self for a comfortable rest,
such as grooming and undressing, reading or listening to
music, saying goodnight to others, and engaging in meditation
or prayers; determining the time of day and length of time
(Continued)
GUIDELINES
32 	AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p32
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 32 of 87 --

Table 2. Occupations (cont’d)
Occupation 	Description
desired for sleeping and the time needed to wake; establishing
sleep patterns that support growth and health (patterns are often
personally and culturally determined); preparing the physical
environment for periods of sleep, such as making the bed or
space on which to sleep, ensuring warmth or coolness and
protection, setting an alarm clock, securing the home (e.g., by
locking doors or closing windows or curtains), setting up sleep-
supporting equipment (e.g., CPAP machine), and turning off
electronics and lights
Sleep participation 	Taking care of personal needs for sleep, such as ceasing ac-
tivities to ensure onset of sleep, napping, and dreaming; sus-
taining a sleep state without disruption; meeting nighttime
toileting and hydration needs, including negotiating the needs of
and interacting with others (e.g., children, partner) within the
social environment, such as providing nighttime caregiving
(e.g., breastfeeding) and monitoring comfort and safety of
others who are sleeping
Education—Activities needed for learning and participating in the educational environment.
Formal educational participation 	Participating in academic (e.g., math, reading, degree course-
work), nonacademic (e.g., recess, lunchroom, hallway),
extracurricular (e.g., sports, band, cheerleading, dances),
technological (e.g., online assignment completion, distance
learning), and vocational (including prevocational) educational
activities
Informal personal educational needs or interests exploration
(beyond formal education)
Identifying topics and methods for obtaining topic-related in-
formation or skills
Informal educational participation 	Participating in classes, programs, and activities that provide
instruction or training outside of a structured curriculum in
identified areas of interest
Work—Labor or exertion related to the development, production, delivery, or management of objects or services; benefits
may be financial or nonfinancial (e.g., social connectedness, contributions to society, structure and routine to daily life;
Christiansen & Townsend, 2010; Dorsey et al., 2019).
Employment interests and pursuits 	Identifying and selecting work opportunities consistent with
personal assets, limitations, goals, and interests (adapted from
Mosey, 1996, p. 342)
Employment seeking and acquisition 	Advocating for oneself; completing, submitting, and reviewing
application materials; preparing for interviews; participating in
interviews and following up afterward; discussing job benefits;
finalizing negotiations
Job performance and maintenance 	Creating, producing, and distributing products and services;
maintaining required work skills and patterns; managing time
use; managing relationships with coworkers, managers, and
customers; following and providing leadership and supervision;
initiating, sustaining, and completing work; complying with
work norms and procedures; seeking and responding to
feedback on performance
(Continued)
GUIDELINES
AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT 	33
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p33
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 33 of 87 --

Table 2. Occupations (cont’d)
Occupation 	Description
Retirement preparation and adjustment 	Determining aptitudes, developing interests and skills, selecting
vocational pursuits, securing required resources, adjusting
lifestyle in the absence of the worker role
Volunteer exploration 	Identifying and learning about community causes, organiza-
tions, and opportunities for unpaid work consistent with per-
sonal skills, interests, location, and time available
Volunteer participation 	Performing unpaid work activities for the benefit of selected
people, causes, or organizations
Play—Activities that are intrinsically motivated, internally controlled, and freely chosen and that may include suspension of
reality (e.g., fantasy; Skard & Bundy, 2008), exploration, humor, risk taking, contests, and celebrations (Eberle, 2014; Sutton-Smith,
2009). Play is a complex and multidimensional phenomenon that is shaped by sociocultural factors (Lynch et al., 2016).
Play exploration 	Identifying play activities, including exploration play, practice
play, pretend play, games with rules, constructive play, and
symbolic play (adapted from Bergen, 1988, pp. 64–65)
Play participation 	Participating in play; maintaining a balance of play with other
occupations; obtaining, using, and maintaining toys, equip-
ment, and supplies
Leisure—“Nonobligatory activity that is intrinsically motivated and engaged in during discretionary time, that is, time not
committed to obligatory occupations such as work, self-care, or sleep” (Parham & Fazio, 1997, p. 250).
Leisure exploration 	Identifying interests, skills, opportunities, and leisure activities
Leisure participation 	Planning and participating in leisure activities; maintaining a
balance of leisure activities with other occupations; obtaining,
using, and maintaining equipment and supplies
Social Participation—Activities that involve social interaction with others, including family, friends, peers, and community
members, and that support social interdependence (Bedell, 2012; Khetani & Coster, 2019; Magasi & Hammel, 2004).
Community participation 	Engaging in activities that result in successful interaction at the
community level (e.g., neighborhood, organization, workplace,
school, digital social network, religious or spiritual group)
Family participation 	Engaging in activities that result in “interaction in specific re-
quired and/or desired familial roles” (Mosey, 1996, p. 340)
Friendships 	Engaging in activities that support “a relationship between two
people based on mutual liking in which partners provide support
to each other in times of need" (Hall, 2017, para. 2)
Intimate partner relationships 	Engaging in activities to initiate and maintain a close relation-
ship, including giving and receiving affection and interacting in
desired roles; intimate partners may or may not engage in sexual
activity
Peer group participation 	Engaging in activities with others who have similar interests,
age, background, or social status
Note. CPAP = continuous positive airway pressure.
GUIDELINES
34 	AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p34
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 34 of 87 --

Table 3. Examples of Occupations for Persons, Groups, and Populations
Persons engage in occupations, and groups engage in shared occupations; populations as a whole do not engage in shared
occupations, which happen at the person or group level. Occupational therapy practitioners provide interventions for persons, groups,
and populations.
Occupation Category 	Client Type 	Example
Activities of daily living 	Person 	Older adult completing bathing with assistance
from an adult child
Group 	Students eating lunch during a lunch break
Instrumental activities of daily living 	Person 	Parent using a phone app to pay a babysitter
electronically
Group 	Club members using public transportation to
arrive at a musical performance
Health management 	Person 	Patient scheduling an appointment with a spe-
cialist after referral by the primary care doctor
Group 	Parent association sharing preparation of healthy
foods to serve at a school-sponsored festival
Rest and sleep 	Person 	Person turning off lights and adjusting the room
temperature to 68° before sleep
Group 	Children engaging in nap time at a day care center
Education 	Person 	College student taking an African-American his-
tory class online
Group 	Students working on a collaborative science
project on robotics
Work 	Person 	Electrician turning off power before working on a
power line
Group 	Peers volunteering for a day of action at an animal
shelter
Play 	Person 	Child playing superhero dress up
Group 	Class playing freeze tag during recess
Leisure 	Person 	Family member knitting a sweater for a new baby
Group 	Friends meeting for a craft circle
Social participation 	Person 	New mother going to lunch with friends
Group 	Older adults gathering at a community center to
wrap holiday presents for charity distribution
GUIDELINES
AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT 	35
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p35
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 35 of 87 --

Table 4. Context: Environmental Factors
Context is the broad construct that encompasses environmental factors and personal factors. Environmental factors are aspects of the
physical, social, and attitudinal surroundings in which people live and conduct their lives.
Environmental Factor 	Components 	Examples
Natural environment and human-made
changes to the environment: Animate and
inanimate elements of the natural or
physical environment and components of
that environment that have been modified
by people, as well as characteristics of
human populations within the
environment
Physical geography 	• Raised flower beds in a backyard
• Local stream cleanup by Boy Scouts
during a community service day project
• Highway expansion cutting through an
established neighborhood
Population: Groups of people living in a
given environment who share the same
pattern of environmental adaptation
• Universal access playground where
children with mobility impairment can
play
• Hearing loop installed in a synagogue
for congregation members with hearing
aids
• Tree-shaded, solid-surface walking path
enjoyed by older adults in a senior living
community
Flora (plants) and fauna (animals) 	• Nonshedding service dog
• Family-owned herd of cattle
• Community garden
Climate: Meteorological features and
events, such as weather
• Sunny day requiring use of sunglasses
• Rain shower prompting a crew of road
workers to don rain gear
• Unusually high temperatures turning a
community ice skating pond to slush
Natural events: Regular or irregular geo-
graphic and atmospheric changes that
cause disruption in the physical
environment
• Barometric pressure causing a
headache
• Flood of a local creek damaging
neighborhood homes
• Hurricane devastating a low-lying
region
Human-caused events: Alterations or dis-
turbances in the natural environment
caused by humans that result in the dis-
ruption of day-to-day life
• High air pollution forcing a person with
lung disease to stay indoors
• Accessible dock at a local river park
demolished to make way for a new
bridge construction project
• Derailment of a train loaded with highly
combustible chemicals leading to the
emergency total evacuation of a small
town
Light: Light intensity and quality 	• Darkness requiring use of a reading lamp
• Office with ample natural light
• Street lamps
Time-related changes: Natural, regularly
occurring, or predictable change; rhythm
and duration of activity; time of day, week,
month, season, or year; day–night cycles;
lunar cycles
• Jet lag
• Quitting time at the end of a work shift
• Summer solstice
(Continued)
GUIDELINES
36 	AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p36
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 36 of 87 --

Table 4. Context: Environmental Factors (cont’d)
Environmental Factor 	Components 	Examples
Sound and vibration: Heard or felt phe-
nomena that may provide useful or dis-
tracting information about the world
• Vibration of a cell phone indicating a
text message
• Bell signaling the start of the school day
• Outdoor emergency warning system on
a college campus
Air quality: Characteristics of the atmo-
sphere (outside buildings) or enclosed
areas of air (inside buildings)
• Heavy perfume use by a family member
causing an asthmatic reaction
• Smoking area outside an office building
• High incidence of respiratory diseases
near an industrial district
Products and technology: Natural or
human-made products or systems of
products, equipment, and technology that
are gathered, created, produced, or
manufactured
Food, drugs, and other products or sub-
stances for personal consumption
• Preferred snack
• Injectable hormones for a transgender
man
• Grade-school cafeteria lunch
General products and technology for
personal use in daily living (including
assistive technology and products)
• Toothbrush
• Household refrigerator
• Shower in a fitness or exercise facility
Personal indoor and outdoor mobility and
transportation equipment used by people
in activities requiring movement inside and
outside of buildings
• Four-wheeled walker
• Family car
• Elevator in a multistory apartment
building
Communication: Activities involving
sending and receiving information
• Hearing aid
• Text chain via personal cell phones
• Use of emergency response system to
warn region of impending dangerous
storms
Education: Processes and methods for
acquiring knowledge, expertise, or skill
• Textbook
• Online course
• Curriculum for workplace sexual ha-
rassment program
Employment: Paid work activities 	• Home office for remote work
• Assembly factory
• Internet connection for health care workers
to access electronic medical records
Cultural, recreational, and sporting
activities
• Gaming console
• Instruments for a university marching
band
• Soccer stadium
Practice of religion and spirituality 	• Prayer rug
• Temple
• Sunday church service television
broadcast
Indoor and outdoor human-made envi-
ronments that are planned, designed, and
constructed for public and private use
• Home bathroom with grab bars and
raised toilet seat
• Accessible playground at a city park
• Zero-grade entry to a shopping mall
(Continued)
GUIDELINES
AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT 	37
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p37
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 37 of 87 --

Table 4. Context: Environmental Factors (cont’d)
Environmental Factor 	Components 	Examples
Assets for economic exchange, such as
money, goods, property, and other valu-
ables that an individual owns or has rights
to use
• Pocket change
• Household budget
• Condominium association tax bill
Virtual environments occurring in simu-
lated, real-time, and near-time situations,
absent of physical contact
• Personal cell phone
• Synchronous video meeting of co-
workers in distant locations
• Open-source video gaming community
Support and relationships: People or ani-
mals that provide practical physical or
emotional support, nurturing, protection,
assistance, and relationships to other
persons in the home, workplace, or school
or at play or in other aspects of their daily
activities
Immediate and extended family 	• Spouses, partners, parents, siblings,
foster parents, and adoptive
grandparents
• Biological families and found or con-
structed families
Friends, acquaintances, peers, colleagues,
neighbors, and community members
• Trusted best friend
• Coworkers
• Helpful next-door neighbor
• Substance abuse recovery support
group sponsor
People in positions of authority and those
in subordinate positions
• Teacher who offers extra tutoring
• Legal guardian for a parentless minor
• Female religious reporting to a sister
superior
• New employee being oriented to the job
tasks by an assigned mentor
Personal care providers and personal as-
sistants providing support to individuals
Health care professionals and other
professionals serving a community
Domesticated animals 	• Therapy dog program in a senior living
community
• Horse kept to draw a buggy for an
Amish family’s transportation
Attitudes: Observable evidence of cus-
toms, practices, ideologies, values, norms,
factual beliefs, and religious beliefs held by
people other than the client
Individual attitudes of immediate and ex-
tended family, friends and acquaintances,
peers and colleagues, neighbors and
community members, people in positions
of authority and subordinate positions,
personal care providers and personal as-
sistants, strangers, and health care and
other professionals
• Shared grief over the untimely death of
a sibling
• Automatic trust from a patient who
knows one’s father
• Reliance among members of a faith
community
Societal attitudes, including discriminatory
practices
• Failure to acknowledge a young person
who wants to vote for the first time
• Racial discrimination in job hiring
processes
Social norms, practices, and ideologies
that marginalize specific populations
No time off work allowed to observe a
religion’s holy day
Services, systems, and policies: Benefits,
structured programs, and regulations for
operations, provided by institutions in
Services designed to meet the needs of
persons, groups, and populations
• Economic services, including Social
Security income and public assistance
(Continued)
GUIDELINES
38 	AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p38
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 38 of 87 --

Table 4. Context: Environmental Factors (cont’d)
Environmental Factor 	Components 	Examples
various sectors of society, designed to
meet the needs of persons, groups, and
populations
• Health services for preventing and
treating health problems, providing
medical rehabilitation, and promoting
healthy lifestyles
Systems established by governments at
the local, regional, national, and interna-
tional levels or by other recognized
authorities
• Public utilities (e.g., water, electricity,
sanitation)
• Communications (transmission and
exchange of information)
• Transportation systems
• Political systems related to voting,
elections, and governance
Policies constituted by rules, regulations,
conventions, and standards established by
governments at the local, regional, na-
tional, and international levels or by other
recognized authorities
• Architecture, construction, open space
use, and housing policies
• Civil protection and legal services
• Labor and employment policies related
to finding suitable work, looking for
different work, or seeking promotion
GUIDELINES
AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT 	39
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p39
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 39 of 87 --

Table 5. Context: Personal Factors
Context is the broad construct that encompasses environmental factors and personal factors. Personal factors are the particular
background of a person’s life and living and consist of the unique features of the person that are not part of a health condition or health
state.
Personal Factor 	Person A 	Person B
Age (chronological) 	• 48 years old 	• 14 years old
Sexual orientation 	• Attracted to men 	• Attracted to all genders
Gender identity 	• Female 	• Male
Race and ethnicity 	• Black French Caribbean 	• Southeast Asian Hmong
Cultural identification and cultural attitudes • Urban Black
• Feminist
• Caribbean island identification
• Traditional clan structure
• Elders who are decision makers for
community
Social background, social status, and so-
cioeconomic status
• Urban, upscale neighborhood
• Friends in the professional workforce
• Income that allows for luxury
• Family owns small home
• Father with a stable job in light
manufacturing
• Mother who is a child care provider for
neighborhood children
Upbringing and life experiences 	• No siblings
• Raised in household with grandmother
as caregiver
• Moved from California to Boston while an
adolescent
• Traditional
• Born in a refugee camp before parents
emigrated
• Youngest of five siblings
• Lives in a small city in the Upper
Midwest
Habits and past and current behavioral
patterns
• Coffee before anything else
• Meticulous about dress
• Organized and attentive to family
• Never misses a family meal
Individual psychological assets, including
temperament, character traits, and coping
styles, for handling responsibilities, stress,
crises, and other psychological demands
(e.g., extroversion, agreeableness, con-
scientiousness, psychic stability, open-
ness to experience, optimism, confidence)
• Anxious when not working
• Extroverted
• High level of confidence
• Readily adapts approach to and inter-
actions with those who are culturally
different
• Known for being calm
• Not outgoing but friendly to all
• Does not speak up or complain at
school during conflict
Education 	• Master’s degree in political science
• Law degree
• High school freshman
• Advanced skills in the sciences
Profession and professional identity 	• Public interest lawyer 	• Public high school student
Lifestyle 	• High-rise apartment
• Likes urban nightlife and casual dating
• Works long hours
• Engaged in clan and community
• Four older siblings who live nearby
Other health conditions and fitness 	• Treated for anorexia nervosa while an
adolescent
• Occasional runner
• Wears eyeglasses for astigmatism
• Sedentary at home except for assigned
chores
GUIDELINES
40 	AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p40
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 40 of 87 --

Table 6. Performance Patterns
Performance patterns are the habits, routines, roles, and rituals that may be associated with different lifestyles and used in the process
of engaging in occupations or activities. These patterns are influenced by context and time use and can support or hinder occupational
performance.
Category 	Description 	Examples
Person
Habits 	“Specific, automatic behaviors performed repeat-
edly, relatively automatically, and with little varia-
tion” (Matuska & Barrett, 2019, p. 214). Habits can
be healthy or unhealthy, efficient or inefficient, and
supportive or harmful (Dunn, 2000).
• Automatically puts car keys in the same place
• Spontaneously looks both ways before crossing
the street
• Always turns off the stove burner before re-
moving a cooking pot
• Activates the alarm system before leaving the
home
• Always checks smartphone for emails or text
messages on waking
• Snacks when watching television
Routines 	Patterns of behavior that are observable, regular,
and repetitive and that provide structure for daily
life. They can be satisfying, promoting, or dam-
aging. Routines require delimited time commit-
ment and are embedded in cultural and ecological
contexts (Fiese, 2007; Segal, 2004).
• Follows a morning sequence to complete toi-
leting, bathing, hygiene, and dressing
• Follows the sequence of steps involved in meal
preparation
• Manages morning routine to drop children off at
school and arrive at work on time
Roles 	Aspects of identity shaped by culture and context
that may be further conceptualized and defined by
the client and the activities and occupations one
engages in.
• Sibling in a family with three children
• Retired military personnel
• Volunteer at a local park district
• Mother of an adolescent with developmental
disabilities
• Student with a learning disability studying
computer technology
• Corporate executive returning to part-time work
after a stroke
Rituals 	Symbolic actions with spiritual, cultural, or social
meaning contributing to the client’s identity and
reinforcing values and beliefs. Rituals have a strong
affective component and consist of a collection of
events (Fiese, 2007; Fiese et al., 2002; Segal,
2004).
• Shares a highlight from the day during evening
meals with family
• Kisses a sacred book before opening the pages
to read
• Recites the Pledge of Allegiance before the start
of the school day
Group and Population
Routines 	Patterns of behavior that are observable, regular,
and repetitive and that provide structure for daily
life. They can be satisfying, promoting, or dam-
aging. Time provides an organizational structure or
rhythm for routines (Larson & Zemke, 2003).
Routines are embedded in cultural and ecological
contexts (Segal, 2004).
Group
• Workers attending weekly staff meetings
• Students turning in homework assignments as
they enter the classroom
• Exercise class attendees setting up their mats
and towels before class
Population
• Parents of young children following health
practices such as yearly checkups and sched-
uled immunizations
(Continued)
GUIDELINES
AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT 	41
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p41
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 41 of 87 --

Table 6. Performance Patterns (cont’d)
Category 	Description 	Examples
• Corporations following business practices such
as providing services for disadvantaged pop-
ulations (e.g., loans to underrepresented
groups)
• School districts following legislative procedures
such as those associated with the Individuals
With Disabilities Education Improvement Act of
2004 (Pub. L. 108-446) or Medicare
Roles 	Sets of behaviors by the group or population ex-
pected by society and shaped by culture and
context that may be further conceptualized and
defined by the group or population.
Group
• Nonprofit civic group providing housing for
people living with mental illness
• Humanitarian group distributing food and
clothing donations to refugees
• Student organization in a university educating
elementary school children about preventing
bullying
Population
• Parents providing care for children until they
become adults
• Grandparents or older community members
being consulted before decisions are made
Rituals 	Shared social actions with traditional, emotional,
purposive, and technological meaning contributing
to values and beliefs within the group or
population.
Group
• Employees of a company attending an annual
holiday celebration
• Members of a community agency hosting a
fundraiser every spring
Population
• Citizens of a country suspending work activities
in observance of a national holiday
GUIDELINES
42 	AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p42
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 42 of 87 --

Table 7. Performance Skills for Persons
Performance skills are observable, goal-directed actions that result in a client’s quality of performing desired occupations. Skills are
supported by the context in which the performance occurs, including environmental and client factors (Fisher & Marterella, 2019).
Effective use of motor and process performance skills is demonstrated when the client carries out an activity efficiently, safely, with
ease, or without assistance. Effective use of social interaction performance skills is demonstrated when the client completes
interactions in a manner that matches the demands of the social situation. Ineffective use of performance skills is demonstrated when
the client routinely requires assistance or support to perform activities or engage in social interactions.
The examples in this table are limited to descriptions of the client’s ability to use each performance skill in an effective or ineffective
manner. A client who demonstrates ineffective use of performance skills may be able to successfully complete the entire occupation
with the use of occupational or environmental adaptations. Successful occupational performance by the client may be achieved when
such adaptions are used.
Specific Skill Definitions
Examples
Effective Performancea 	Ineffective Performanceb
Motor Skills—“Motor skills are the group of performance skills that represent small, observable actions related to moving
oneself or moving and interacting with tangible task objects (e.g., tools, utensils, clothing, food or other supplies, digital devices,
plant life) in the context of performing a personally and ecologically relevant daily life task” (Fisher & Marterella, 2019, p. 331).
Positioning the body 	Washing dishes at the kitchen sink
Stabilizes—Moves through task environ-
ment and interacts with task objects
without momentary propping or loss of
balance
Person moves through the kitchen without
propping or loss of balance.
Person momentarily props on the counter
to stabilize body while standing at the sink
and washing dishes.
Aligns—Interacts with task objects with-
out evidence of persistent propping or
leaning
Person washes dishes without using the
counter for support.
Person persistently leans on the counter,
resulting in ineffective performance when
washing dishes.
Positions—Positions self an effective
distance from task objects and without
evidence of awkward arm or body
positions
Person places body or wheelchair at an
effective distance for washing dishes.
Person positions body or wheelchair too
far from the sink, resulting in difficulty
reaching for dishes in the sink.
Obtaining and holding objects 	Acquiring a game from a cabinet in preparation for a family activity
Reaches—Effectively extends arm and,
when appropriate, bends trunk to ef-
fectively grasp or place task objects that
are out of reach
Person reaches without effort for the game
box.
Person reaches with excessive physical
effort for the game box.
Bends—Flexes or rotates trunk as ap-
propriate when sitting down or when
bending to grasp or place task objects
that are out of reach
Person bends without effort when reach-
ing for the game box.
Person demonstrates excessive stiffness
when bending to reach for the game box.
Grips—Effectively pinches or grasps task
objects such that the objects do not slip
(e.g., from between fingers, from be-
tween teeth, from between hand and
supporting surface)
Person grips the game box and game
pieces, and they do not slip from the hand.
Person grips the game box ineffectively,
and the box slips from the hand so that
game pieces spill.
Manipulates—Uses dexterous finger
movements, without evidence of fum-
bling, when manipulating task objects
Person readily manipulates the game
pieces with fingers while setting up and
playing the game.
Person fumbles the game pieces so that
some pieces fall off the game board.
(Continued)
GUIDELINES
AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT 	43
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p43
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 43 of 87 --

Table 7. Performance Skills for Persons (cont’d)
Specific Skill Definitions
Examples
Effective Performancea 	Ineffective Performanceb
Performance Skills: Motor Skills (cont’d)
Moving self and objects 	Completing janitorial tasks at a factory site
Coordinates—Uses two or more body
parts together to manipulate and hold
task objects without evidence of fumbling
or task objects slipping from the grasp
Person uses both hands to shuffle the
game cards without fumbling them, and
the cards do not slip from the hands.
Person uses both hands to shuffle the
cards but fumbles the deck, and the cards
slip out of the hands.
Moves—Effectively pushes or pulls task
objects along a supporting surface,
pulls to open or pushes to close doors
and drawers, or pushes on wheels to
propel a wheelchair
Person moves the broom easily, pushing
and pulling it across the floor.
Person demonstrates excessive effort to
move the broom across the floor when
sweeping.
Lifts—Effectively raises or lifts task objects
without evidence of excessive physical
effort
Person easily lifts cleaning supplies out of
the cart.
Person needs to use both hands to lift
small lightweight containers of cleaning
supplies out of the cart.
Walks—During task performance, ambu-
lates on level surfaces without shuffling
feet, becoming unstable, propping, or
using assistive devices
Person walks steadily through the factory. Person demonstrates unstable walking
while performing janitorial duties or walks
while supporting self on the cart.
Transports—Carries task objects from one
place to another while walking or
moving in a wheelchair
Person carries cleaning supplies from one
factory location to another, either by
walking or using a wheelchair, without
effort.
Person is unstable when transporting
cleaning supplies throughout the factory.
Calibrates—Uses movements of appro-
priate force, speed, or extent when
interacting with task objects (e.g., does
not crush task objects, pushes a door
with enough force to close it without a
bang)
Person uses an appropriate amount of
force to squeeze liquid soap onto a
cleaning cloth.
Person applies too little force to squeeze
soap out of the container onto the
cleaning cloth.
Flows—Uses smooth and fluid arm and
wrist movements when interacting with
task objects
Person demonstrates fluid arm and wrist
movements when wiping tables.
Person demonstrates stiff and jerky arm
and wrist movements when wiping
tables.
Sustaining performance 	Bathing an older parent as caregiver
Endures—Persists and completes the task
without demonstrating physical fatigue,
pausing to rest, or stopping to catch
breath
Person completes bathing of parent
without evidence of physical fatigue.
Person stops to rest, interrupting the task
of bathing the parent.
Paces—Maintains a consistent and ef-
fective rate or tempo of performance
throughout the entire task performance
Person uses an appropriate tempo when
bathing the parent.
Person sometimes rushes or delays ac-
tions when bathing the parent.
Process Skills—“Process skills are the group of performance skills that represent small, observable actions related to selecting,
interacting with, and using tangible task objects (e.g., tools, utensils, clothing, food or other supplies, digital devices, plant life);
carrying out individual actions and steps; and preventing problems of occupational performance from occurring or reoccurring in
the context of performing a personally and ecologically relevant daily life task” (Fisher & Marterella, 2019, pp. 336–337).
(Continued)
GUIDELINES
44 	AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p44
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 44 of 87 --

Table 7. Performance Skills for Persons (cont’d)
Specific Skill Definitions
Examples
Effective Performancea 	Ineffective Performanceb
Performance Skills: Process Skills (cont’d)
Sustaining performance 	Writing sentences for a school assignment
Paces—Maintains a consistent and ef-
fective rate or tempo of performance
throughout the entire task performance
Person uses a consistent and even tempo
when writing sentences.
Person rushes writing sentences,
resulting in incorrectly formed letters or
misspelled words.
Attends—Does not look away from task
performance, maintaining the ongoing
task progression
Person maintains gaze on the assignment
and continues writing sentences without
pause.
Person looks toward another student and
pauses when writing sentences.
Heeds—Carries out and completes the
task originally agreed on or specified by
another person
Person completes the assignment, writing
the number of sentences required.
Person writes fewer sentences than re-
quired, not completing the assignment.
Applying knowledge 	Taking prescribed medications
Chooses—Selects necessary and appro-
priate type and number of objects for
the task, including the task objects that
one chooses or is directed to use (e.g.,
by a teacher)
Person chooses specified medicine bottles
appropriate for the specific timed dose.
Person chooses an incorrect medicine
bottle for the specific timed dose.
Uses—Applies task objects as they are
intended (e.g., using a pencil sharpener
to sharpen a pencil but not a crayon)
and in a hygienic fashion
Person uses a medicine spoon to take a
dose of liquid medicine.
Person uses a tablespoon to take a 1-
teaspoon dose of liquid medicine.
Handles—Supports or stabilizes task ob-
jects appropriately, protecting them
from being damaged, slipping, moving,
or falling
Person supports the medicine bottle,
keeping it upright without the bottle tip-
ping or falling.
Person allows the medicine bottle to tip,
and pills spill from the bottle.
Inquires—(1) Seeks needed verbal or
written information by asking questions
or reading directions or labels and (2)
does not ask for information when fully
oriented to the task and environment
and recently aware of the answer
Person reads the label on the
medicine bottle before taking the
medication.
Person asks the care provider what dose
to take having already read the dose on
the label.
Organizing timing 	Using an ATM to get cash to pay a babysitter
Initiates—Starts or begins the next task
action or task step without any
hesitation
Person begins each step of ATM use
without hesitation.
Person pauses before entering the PIN
into the ATM.
Continues—Performs single actions or
steps without any interruptions so that
once an action or task step is initiated,
performance continues without pauses
or delays until the action or step is
completed
Person completes each step of ATM use
without delays.
Person starts to enter the PIN, pauses,
and then continues entering the PIN.
(Continued)
GUIDELINES
AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT 	45
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p45
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 45 of 87 --

Table 7. Performance Skills for Persons (cont’d)
Specific Skill Definitions
Examples
Effective Performancea 	Ineffective Performanceb
Performance Skills: Process Skills (cont’d)
Sequences—Performs steps in an effec-
tive or logical order and with an absence
of randomness in the ordering or in-
appropriate repetition of steps
Person completes each step of ATM use in
logical order.
Person attempts to enter the PIN before
inserting the bank card into the card
reader.
Terminates—Brings to completion single
actions or single steps without inappro-
priate persistence or premature cessation
Person completes each step of ATM use in
the appropriate length of time.
Person persists in entering numbers after
completing the four-digit PIN.
Organizing space and objects 	Managing clerical duties for a large company
Searches/locates—Looks for and locates
task objects in a logical manner
Person readily locates needed office sup-
plies from shelves and drawers.
Person searches a shelf a second time to
locate needed clerical supplies.
Gathers—Collects related task objects into
the same work space and regathers task
objects that have spilled, fallen, or been
misplaced
Person gathers required clerical tools and
supplies in the assigned work space.
Person places required paper and pen in
different work spaces and then must
move them to the same work space.
Organizes—Logically positions or spatially
arranges task objects in an orderly fashion
within a single work space or between
multiple appropriate work spaces such that
the work space is not too spread out or too
crowded
Person organizes required clerical tools
and supplies within the work space so all
are within reach.
Person places books on top of papers,
resulting in a crowded work space.
Restores—Puts away task objects in ap-
propriate places and ensures that the
immediate work space is restored to its
original condition
Person returns clerical tools and supplies
to their original storage location.
Person puts pens and extra paper in a
different storage closet from where
originally found.
Navigates—Moves body or wheelchair
without bumping into obstacles when
moving through the task environment
or interacting with task objects
Person moves through the office space
without bumping into office furniture or
machines.
Person bumps hand into the edge of the
desk when reaching for a pen from the
pen holder.
Adapting performance 	Preparing a green salad for a family meal
Notices/responds—Responds appropri-
ately to (1) nonverbal task-related cues
(e.g., heat, movement), (2) the spatial
arrangement and alignment of task
objects to one another, and (3) cup-
board doors or drawers that have been
left open during task performance
Person notices the carrot rolling off the
cutting board and catches it before it rolls
onto the floor.
Person delays noticing a rolling carrot,
and it rolls off the cutting board onto the
floor.
Adjusts—Overcomes problems with on-
going task performance effectively by
(1) going to a new workspace; (2)
moving task objects out of the current
workspace; or (3) adjusting knobs, di-
als, switches, or water taps
Person readily adjusts the flow of water
from the tap when washing vegetables.
Person delays turning off the water tap
after washing the vegetables.
(Continued)
GUIDELINES
46 	AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p46
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 46 of 87 --

Table 7. Performance Skills for Persons (cont’d)
Specific Skill Definitions
Examples
Effective Performancea 	Ineffective Performanceb
Performance Skills: Process Skills (cont’d)
Accommodates—Prevents ineffective
performance of all other motor and
process skills and asks for assistance
only when appropriate or needed
Person prevents problems from occurring
during the salad preparation.
Person does not prevent problems from
occurring, such as carrots rolling off the
cutting board and onto the floor.
Benefits—Prevents ineffective perfor-
mance of all other motor and process
skills from recurring or persisting
Person prevents problems from continu-
ing or reoccurring during the salad
preparation.
Person retrieves the carrot from the floor
and puts it back on the cutting board, and
the carrot rolls off the board again.
Social Interaction Skills—“Social interaction skills are the group of performance skills that represent small, observable actions
related to communicating and interacting with others in the context of engaging in a personally and ecologically relevant daily
life task performance that involves social interaction with others” (Fisher & Marterella, 2019, p. 342).
Initiating and terminating social interaction 	Participating in a community support group
Approaches/starts—Approaches or initi-
ates interaction with the social partner
in a manner that is socially appropriate
Person politely begins interactions with
support group members.
Person begins interactions with support
group members by yelling at them from
across the room.
Concludes/disengages—Effectively termi-
nates the conversation or social inter-
action, brings to closure the topic under
discussion, and disengages or says
goodbye
Person politely ends a conversation with a
support group member.
Person abruptly ends interaction with the
support group by walking out of the
room.
Producing social interaction 	Child playing in the sandbox with others to build roads for cars and trucks
Produces speech—Produces spoken,
signed, or augmentative (i.e., com-
puter-generated) messages that are
audible and clearly articulated
Person produces clear verbal, signed, or
augmentative messages to communicate
with other children playing in the sandbox.
Person mumbles when interacting with
other children playing in the sandbox, and
the other children do not understand the
message.
Gesticulates—Uses socially appropriate
gestures to communicate or support a
message
Person gestures by waving or pointing
while communicating with other children
playing in the sandbox.
Person uses aggressive gestures when
interacting with other children playing in
the sandbox.
Speaks fluently—Speaks in a fluent and
continuous manner, with an even pace
(not too fast, not too slow) and without
pauses or delays, while sending a
message
Person speaks, without pausing, stutter-
ing, or hesitating, when engaging with
other children playing in the sandbox.
Person hesitates or pauses when talking
with other children playing in the
sandbox.
Physically supporting social interaction
Older adult in a senior residence talking with other residents
during a shared mealtime
Turns toward—Actively positions or turns
body and face toward the social partner
or the person who is speaking
Person turns body and face toward other
residents while interacting during the
meal.
Person turns face away from other resi-
dents while interacting during the meal.
Looks—Makes eye contact with the social
partner
Person makes eye contact with other
residents while interacting during the
meal.
Person looks down at own plate while
interacting during the meal.
(Continued)
GUIDELINES
AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT 	47
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p47
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 47 of 87 --

Table 7. Performance Skills for Persons (cont’d)
Specific Skill Definitions
Examples
Effective Performancea 	Ineffective Performanceb
Performance Skills: Social Interaction Skills (cont’d)
Places self—Positions self at an appro-
priate distance from the social partner
Person sits an appropriate distance from
other residents at the table.
Person sits too far from other residents,
interfering with interactions.
Touches—Responds to and uses touch or
bodily contact with the social partner in
a socially appropriate manner
Person touches other residents appropri-
ately during the meal.
Person reaches out, grasps another
resident’s shirt, and abruptly pulls on it
during the meal.
Regulates—Does not demonstrate irrele-
vant, repetitive, or impulsive behaviors
during social interaction
Person avoids demonstrating irrelevant,
repetitive, or impulsive behaviors while
interacting during the meal.
Person repeatedly taps the fork on the
plate while interacting during the meal.
Shaping content of social interaction 	Serving ice cream to customers in an ice cream shop
Questions—Requests relevant facts and
information and asks questions that
support the intended purpose of the
social interaction
Person asks customers for their choice of
ice cream flavor.
Person asks customers for their choice of
ice cream flavor and then repeats the
question after they respond.
Replies—Keeps conversation going by
replying appropriately to suggestions,
opinions, questions, and comments
Person readily replies with relevant an-
swers to customers’ questions about ice
cream products.
Person delays in replying to customers’
questions or provides irrelevant
information.
Discloses—Reveals opinions, feelings,
and private information about self or
others in a socially appropriate manner
Person discloses no personal information
about self or others to customers.
Person reveals socially inappropriate
details about own family.
Expresses emotions—Displays affect and
emotions in a socially appropriate
manner
Person displays socially appropriate
emotions when sending messages to
customers.
Person uses a sarcastic tone of voice
when describing ice cream flavor options.
Disagrees—Expresses differences of
opinion in a socially appropriate manner
Person expresses a difference of opinion
about ice cream products in a polite way.
Person becomes argumentative when a
customer requests a flavor that is not
available.
Thanks—Uses appropriate words and
gestures to acknowledge receipt of
services, gifts, or compliments
Person thanks the customers for pur-
chasing ice cream.
Person fails to say thank you after cus-
tomers purchase ice cream.
Maintaining flow of social interaction
Sharing suggestions with others in a support group for persons experiencing
mental health challenges
Transitions—Handles transitions in the
conversation or changes the topic
without disrupting the ongoing
conversation
Person offers comments or suggestions
that relate to the topic of mental health
challenges, smoothly moving the topic in a
relevant direction.
Person abruptly changes the topic of
conversation to planning social activities
during a discussion of mental health
challenges.
Times response—Replies to social mes-
sages without delay or hesitation and
without interrupting the social partner
Person replies to another group member’s
question about community supports for
mental health challenges after briefly
considering how best to respond.
Person replies to another group mem-
ber’s question about community sup-
ports for mental health challenges before
the other person finishes asking the
question.
(Continued)
GUIDELINES
48 	AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p48
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 48 of 87 --

Table 7. Performance Skills for Persons (cont’d)
Specific Skill Definitions
Examples
Effective Performancea 	Ineffective Performanceb
Performance Skills: Social Interaction Skills (cont’d)
Times duration—Speaks for a reasonable
length of time given the complexity of
the message
Person sends messages about mental
health challenges of an appropriate length.
Person sends prolonged messages con-
taining extraneous details.
Takes turns—Speaks in turn and gives the
social partner the freedom to take their turn
Person engages in back-and-forth con-
versation with others in the group.
Person does not respond to comments
from others during the group discussion.
Verbally supporting social interaction 	Visiting a Social Security office to obtain information relative to potential benefits
Matches language—Uses a tone of voice,
dialect, and level of language that are so-
cially appropriate and matched to the social
partner’s abilities and level of understanding
Person uses a tone of voice and vocabulary
that match those of the Social Security
agent.
Person uses a loud voice and slang when
interacting with the Social Security agent.
Clarifies—Responds to gestures or verbal
messages from the social partner sig-
naling that the social partner does not
comprehend or understand a message
and ensures that the social partner is
following the conversation
Person rephrases the initial question when
the Social Security agent requests
clarification.
Person asks an unrelated question when
the Social Security agent requests clari-
fication of the initial question.
Acknowledges and encourages—
Acknowledges receipt of messages,
encourages the social partner to con-
tinue the social interaction, and en-
courages all social partners to
participate in the interaction
Person nods to indicate understanding of
the information shared by the Social Se-
curity agent.
Person does not nod or use words to
acknowledge receipt of messages sent by
the Social Security agent.
Empathizes—Expresses a supportive at-
titude toward the social partner by
agreeing with, empathizing with, or
expressing understanding of the social
partner’s feelings and experiences
Person shows empathy when the Social
Security agent expresses frustration with
the slow computer system.
Person shows impatience when the So-
cial Security agent expresses frustration
with the slow computer system.
Adapting social interaction 	Deciding which restaurant to go to with a group of friends
Heeds—Uses goal-directed social inter-
actions focused on carrying out and
completing the intended purpose of the
social interaction
Person maintains focus on deciding which
restaurant to go to.
Person makes comments unrelated to
choosing a restaurant, disrupting the
group decision making.
Accommodates—Prevents ineffective or
socially inappropriate social interaction
Person avoids making ineffective re-
sponses to others about restaurant choice.
Person asks a question that is irrelevant
to choosing a restaurant.
Benefits—Prevents problems with inef-
fective or socially inappropriate social
interaction from recurring or persisting
Person avoids making reoccurring inef-
fective comments during the decision
making.
Person persists in asking questions ir-
relevant to choosing a restaurant.
Note. ATM = automated teller machine; PIN = personal identification number.
a
Effective use of motor and process performance skills is demonstrated when the client carries out an activity efficiently, safely, with ease, or without assistance. Effective use of
social interaction performance skills is demonstrated when the client completes interactions in a manner that matches the demands of the social situation. b
Ineffective
performance skills are demonstrated when the client routinely requires assistance or support to perform activities or engage in social interaction. Ineffective use of social
interaction performance skills is demonstrated when the client engages in social interactions in a manner that does not appropriately meet the demands of the social situation.
Source. From Powerful Practice: A Model for Authentic Occupational Therapy, by A. G. Fisher and A. Marterella, 2019, Fort Collins, CO: Center for Innovative OT
Solutions. Copyright © 2019 by the Center for Innovative OT Solutions. Adapted with permission.
GUIDELINES
AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT 	49
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p49
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 49 of 87 --

Table 8. Performance Skills for Groups
To address performance skills for a group client, occupational therapy practitioners analyze the motor, process, and social interaction
skills of individual group members to identify whether ineffective performance skills may limit the group’s collective outcome.
Italicized words in the middle column are specific performance skills defined in Table 7.
Performance Skill Category
Ineffective Performance by an
Individual Group Member
Impact on Group Collective
Outcome
Group collective outcome: Religious organization committee furnishing spaces for a preschool for member families
Motor—Obtaining and holding objects 	• Member reaches with excessive effort
for chairs stored in closet.
• Member bends with stiffness or exces-
sive effort when reaching for the chairs.
• Member fumbles when gripping writing
materials in preparation for recording
committee decisions for planning.
• Member demonstrates limited finger
dexterity to manipulate tools for as-
sembling storage units for toys.
• Member is unable to coordinate one
hand and trunk to stabilize self while
gripping and loading toys onto shelves.
Other members may need to take re-
sponsibility for obtaining and holding
objects to accommodate the member’s
ineffective motor performance skills
during the process of furnishing pre-
school spaces.
Process—Organizing space and objects 	• Member repeatedly asks for help when
searching for needed furniture or lo-
cating play equipment that is organized
logically in near and distant places within
the building.
• Member does not effectively gather re-
quired play activity materials in the
designated play spaces.
• Member has difficulty organizing toys or
play equipment within the various play
spaces in a logical and orderly fashion.
• Member does not restore toys or play
equipment to storage spaces to return the
preschool space to an effective order.
• Member bumps into play furniture when
navigating spaces to set up furniture to
meet the needs of families or groups.
The group may need to accommodate the
member’s limitations in effectively orga-
nizing space and objects by adjusting the
timing of the outcome to allow greater
time to complete furnishing the preschool
spaces.
Social interaction—Producing social
interaction
• Member communicates in whispers
when producing speech to communicate
with other members about decisions for
placing play equipment.
• Member delays in gesticulating so other
members do not receive effective mes-
sages while arranging toys and play
equipment.
• Member speaks fluently but too quickly
when communicating to friends, resulting
in challenges for other members in deci-
sion making for furnishing the preschool.
The group decision-making process may
be hindered by the member’s difficulty in
producing social interactions. Limited
communication during the tasks of
placing furniture in preschool spaces may
cause confusion among group members.
Source. Performance skill categories are from Powerful Practice: A Model for Authentic Occupational Therapy, by A. G. Fisher and A. Marterella, 2019, Fort Collins,
CO: Center for Innovative OT Solutions. Copyright © 2019 by the Center for Innovative OT Solutions. Adapted with permission.
GUIDELINES
50 	AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p50
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 50 of 87 --

Table 9. Client Factors
Client factors include (1) values, beliefs, and spirituality; (2) body functions; and (3) body structures. Client factors reside within the
client and influence the client’s performance in occupations.
Category 	Examples Relevant to Occupational Therapy Practice
Values, Beliefs, and Spirituality—Client’s (person’s, group’s, or population’s) perceptions, motivations, and related meaning
that influence or are influenced by engagement in occupations.
Values—Acquired beliefs and commitments, derived from
culture, about what is good, right, and important to do
(Kielhofner, 2008)
Person
• Honesty with self and others
• Commitment to family
Group
• Obligation to provide a service
• Fairness
• Inclusion
Population
• Freedom of speech
• Equal opportunities for all
• Tolerance toward others
Beliefs—“Something that is accepted, considered to be true, or
held as an opinion” (“Belief,” 2020).
Person
• One is powerless to influence others.
• Hard work pays off.
Group
• Teaching others how to garden decreases their reliance on
grocery stores.
• Writing letters as part of a neighborhood group can support the
creation of a community park.
Population
• Some personal rights are worth fighting for.
• A new health care policy, as yet untried, will positively affect
society.
Spirituality—“A deep experience of meaning brought about by
engaging in occupations that involve the enacting of personal
values and beliefs, reflection, and intention within a supportive
contextual environment” (Billock, 2005, p. 887). It is important
to recognize spirituality “as dynamic and often evolving”
(Humbert, 2016, p. 12).
Person
• Personal search for purpose and meaning in life
• Guidance of actions by a sense of value beyond the acquisition
of wealth or fame
Group
• Study of religious texts together
• Attendance at a religious service
Population
• Common search for purpose and meaning in life
• Guidance of actions by values agreed on by the collective
Body Functions—“The physiological functions of body systems (including psychological functions)” (WHO, 2001, p. 10).
This section of the table is organized according to the classifications of the ICF; for fuller descriptions and definitions, refer to
WHO (2001). This list is not all inclusive.
(Continued)
GUIDELINES
AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT 	51
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p51
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 51 of 87 --

Table 9. Client Factors (cont’d)
Category 	Examples Relevant to Occupational Therapy Practice
Body Functions (cont'd)
Mental functions
Specific mental functions
Higher level cognitive 	Judgment, concept formation, metacognition, executive func-
tions, praxis, cognitive flexibility, insight
Attention 	Sustained shifting and divided attention, concentration,
distractibility
Memory 	Short-term, long-term, and working memory
Perception 	Discrimination of sensations (e.g., auditory, tactile, visual, ol-
factory, gustatory, vestibular, proprioceptive)
Thought 	Control and content of thought, awareness of reality vs. delu-
sions, logical and coherent thought
Mental functions of sequencing complex movement 	Mental functions that regulate the speed, response, quality, and
time of motor production, such as restlessness, toe tapping, or
hand wringing, in response to inner tension
Emotional 	Regulation and range of emotions; appropriateness of emotions,
including anger, love, tension, and anxiety; lability of emotions
Experience of self and time 	Awareness of one’s identity (including gender identity), body, and
position in the reality of one’s environment and of time
Global mental functions
Consciousness 	State of awareness and alertness, including the clarity and
continuity of the wakeful state
Orientation 	Orientation to person, place, time, self, and others
Psychosocial 	General mental functions, as they develop over the life span,
required to understand and constructively integrate the mental
functions that lead to the formation of the personal and inter-
personal skills needed to establish reciprocal social interactions,
in terms of both meaning and purpose
Temperament and personality 	Extroversion, introversion, agreeableness, conscientiousness,
emotional stability, openness to experience, self-control, self-
expression, confidence, motivation, impulse control, appetite
Energy 	Energy level, motivation, appetite, craving, impulse
Sleep 	Physiological process, quality of sleep
Sensory functions
Visual functions 	Quality of vision, visual acuity, visual stability, and visual field
functions to promote visual awareness of environment at var-
ious distances for functioning
Hearing functions 	Sound detection and discrimination; awareness of location and
distance of sounds
Vestibular functions 	Sensation related to position, balance, and secure movement
against gravity
Taste functions 	Association of taste qualities of bitterness, sweetness, sourness,
and saltiness
Smell functions 	Sensing of odors and smells
Proprioceptive functions 	Awareness of body position and space
(Continued)
GUIDELINES
52 	AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p52
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 52 of 87 --

Table 9. Client Factors (cont’d)
Category 	Examples Relevant to Occupational Therapy Practice
Body Functions (cont'd)
Touch functions 	Feeling of being touched by others or touching various textures,
such as those of food; presence of numbness, paresthesia,
hyperesthesia
Interoception 	Internal detection of changes in one’s internal organs through
specific sensory receptors (e.g., awareness of hunger, thirst,
digestion, state of alertness)
Pain 	Unpleasant feeling indicating potential or actual damage to some
body structure; sensations of generalized or localized pain (e.g.,
diffuse, dull, sharp, phantom)
Sensitivity to temperature and pressure 	Thermal awareness (hot and cold), sense of force applied to skin
(thermoreception)
Neuromusculoskeletal and movement-related functions
Functions of joints and bones
Joint mobility 	Joint range of motion
Joint stability 	Maintenance of structural integrity of joints throughout the
body; physiological stability of joints related to structural
integrity
Muscle functions
Muscle power 	Strength
Muscle tone 	Degree of muscle tension (e.g., flaccidity, spasticity, fluctuation)
Muscle endurance 	Sustainability of muscle contraction
Movement functions
Motor reflexes 	Involuntary contraction of muscles automatically induced by
specific stimuli (e.g., stretch, asymmetrical tonic neck, sym-
metrical tonic neck)
Involuntary movement reactions 	Postural reactions, body adjustment reactions, supporting
reactions
Control of voluntary movement 	Eye–hand and eye–foot coordination, bilateral integration,
crossing of the midline, fine and gross motor control, oculo-
motor function (e.g., saccades, pursuits, accommodation,
binocularity)
Gait patterns 	Gait and mobility in relation to engagement in daily life activities
(e.g., walking patterns and impairments, asymmetric gait, stiff
gait)
Cardiovascular, hematological, immune, and respiratory system functions
(Note. Occupational therapy practitioners have knowledge of these body functions and understand broadly the interaction that
occurs among these functions to support health, well-being, and participation in life through engagement in occupation.)
Cardiovascular system functions 	Maintenance of blood pressure functions (hypertension, hy-
potension, postural hypotension), heart rate and rhythm
Hematological and immune system functions 	Protection against foreign substances, including infection, al-
lergic reactions
Respiratory system functions 	Rate, rhythm, and depth of respiration
Additional functions and sensations of the cardiovascular and
respiratory systems
Physical endurance, aerobic capacity, stamina, fatigability
(Continued)
GUIDELINES
AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT 	53
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p53
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 53 of 87 --

Table 9. Client Factors (cont’d)
Category 	Examples Relevant to Occupational Therapy Practice
Voice and speech functions; digestive, metabolic, and endocrine system functions; genitourinary and reproductive
functions (Note. Occupational therapy practitioners have knowledge of these body functions and understand broadly the
interaction that occurs among these functions to support health, well-being, and participation in life through engagement in
occupation.)
Voice and speech functions 	Fluency and rhythm, alternative vocalization functions
Digestive, metabolic, and endocrine system functions 	Digestive system functions, metabolic system, and endocrine
system functions
Genitourinary and reproductive functions 	Genitourinary and reproductive functions
Skin and related structure functions (Note. Occupational therapy practitioners have knowledge of these body functions and
understand broadly the interaction that occurs among these functions to support health, well-being, and participation in life through
engagement in occupation.)
Skin functions
Hair and nail functions
Protection (presence or absence of wounds, cuts, or abrasions),
repair (wound healing)
Body Structures—“Anatomical parts of the body, such as organs, limbs, and their components” that support body function
(WHO, 2001, p. 10). This section of the table is organized according to the ICF classifications; for fuller descriptions and
definitions, refer to WHO (2001).
Structure of the nervous system
Structures related to the eyes and ears
Structures involved in voice and speech
Structures of the cardiovascular, immunological, and respiratory
systems
Structures related to the digestive, metabolic, and endocrine
systems
Structures related to the genitourinary and reproductive
systems
Structures related to movement
Occupational therapy practitioners have knowledge of body
structures and understand broadly the interaction that occurs
between these structures to support health, well-being, and
participation in life through engagement in occupation.
Note. The categorization of body functions and body structures is based on the ICF (WHO, 2001). The classification was selected because it has received wide
exposure and presents a language that is understood by external audiences. ICF = International Classification of Function, Disability and Health; WHO = World Health
Organization.
GUIDELINES
54 	AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p54
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 54 of 87 --

Table 10. Occupational Therapy Process for Persons, Groups, and Populations
The occupational therapy process applies to work with persons, groups, and populations. The process for groups and populations
mirrors that for persons. The process for populations includes public health approaches, and the process for groups may include both
person and population methods to address occupational performance (Scaffa & Reitz, 2014).
Process
Component
Process Step
Person 	Group 	Population
Evaluation 	Consultation and screening:
• Review client history
• Consult with interprofessional team
• Administer standardized screening
tools
Consultation and screening, envi-
ronmental scan:
• Identify collective need on the basis
of available data
• For each individual in the group,
+ Review history
+ Administer standardized
screening tools
+ Consult with interprofessional
team
Environmental scan, trend analysis,
preplanning:
• Collect data to inform design of
intervention program by identify-
ing information needs
• Identify health trends in targeted
population and potential positive
and negative impacts on occupa-
tional performance
Occupational profile:
• Interview client and caregiver
Occupational profile or community
profile:
• Interview persons who make up the
group
• Engage with persons in the group to
determine their interests, needs, and
priorities
Needs assessment, community
profile:
• Engage with persons within the
population to determine their in-
terests and needs and opportuni-
ties for collaboration
• Identify priorities through
+ Surveys
+ Interviews
+ Group discussions or forums
Analysis of occupational
performance:
• Assess occupational performance
• Conduct occupational and activity
analysis
• Assess contexts
• Assess performance skills and
patterns
• Assess client factors
Analysis of occupational
performance:
• Conduct occupational and activity
analysis
• Assess group context
• Assess the following for individual
group members:
+ Occupational performance
+ Performance skills and patterns
+ Client factors
• Analyze impact of individual per-
formance on the group
Needs assessment, review of sec-
ondary data:
• Evaluate existing quantitative data,
which may include
+ Public health records
+ Prevalence of disease or
disability
+ Demographic data
+ Economic data
Synthesis of evaluation process:
• Review and consolidate information
to select occupational outcomes
and determine impact of perfor-
mance patterns and client factors on
occupation
Synthesis of evaluation process:
• Review and consolidate information
to select collective occupational
outcomes
• Review and consolidate information
regarding each member’s perfor-
mance and its impact on the group
and the group’s occupational per-
formance as a whole
Data analysis and interpretation:
• Review and consolidate informa-
tion to support need for the pro-
gram and identify any missing data
Intervention 	Development of the intervention plan:
• Identify client goals
• Identify intervention outcomes
• Select outcome measures
Development of the intervention plan
or program:
• Identify collective group goals
Program planning:
• Identify short-term program
objectives
• Identify long-term program goals
(Continued)
GUIDELINES
AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT 	55
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p55
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 55 of 87 --

Table 10. Occupational Therapy Process for Persons, Groups, and Populations (cont’d)
Process
Component
Process Step
Person 	Group 	Population
• Select methods for service delivery,
including theoretical framework
• Identify intervention outcomes for
the group
• Select outcome measures
• Select methods for service delivery,
including theoretical framework
• Select outcome measures to be
used in program evaluation
• Select strategies for service deliv-
ery, including theoretical
framework
Intervention implementation:
• Carry out occupational therapy in-
tervention to address specific oc-
cupations, contexts, and
performance patterns and skills af-
fecting performance
Intervention or program
implementation:
• Carry out occupational therapy in-
tervention or program to address
the group’s specific occupations,
contexts, and performance patterns
and skills affecting group
performance
Program implementation:
• Carry out program or advocacy
action to address identified occu-
pational needs
Intervention review:
• Reevaluate and review client’s re-
sponse to intervention
• Review progress toward goals and
outcomes
• Modify plan as needed
Intervention review or program
evaluation:
• Reevaluate and review individual
members’ and the group’s response
to intervention
• Review progress toward goals and
outcomes
• Modify plan as needed
• Evaluate efficiency of program
• Evaluate achievement of determined
objectives
Program evaluation:
• Gather information on program
implementation
• Measure the impact of the program
• Evaluate efficiency of program
• Evaluate achievement of deter-
mined objectives
Outcomes 	Outcomes:
• Use measures to assess progress
toward outcomes
• Identify change in occupational
participation
Outcomes:
• Use measures to assess progress
toward outcomes
• Identify change in occupational
performance of individual members
and the group as a whole
Outcomes:
• Use measures to assess progress
toward long-term program goals
• Identify change in occupational
performance of targeted
population
Transition:
• Facilitate client’s move from one life
role or experience to another, such
as
+ Moving to a new level of care
+ Transitioning between providers
+ Moving into a new setting or
program
Transition:
• Facilitate group members’ move
from one life role or experience to
another, such as
+ Moving to a new level of care
+ Transitioning between providers
+ Moving into a new setting or
program
Sustainability plan:
• Develop action plan to maintain
program
• Identify sources of funding
• Build community capacity and
support relationships to continue
program
Discontinuation:
• Discontinue care after short- and
long-term goals have been achieved
or client chooses to no longer
participate
• Implement discharge plan to sup-
port performance after discontinu-
ation of services
Discontinuation:
• Discontinue care after the group’s
short- and long-term goals have
been achieved
• Implement discharge plan to sup-
port performance after discontinu-
ation of services
Dissemination plan:
• Share results with participants,
stakeholders, and community
members
• Implement sustainability plan
GUIDELINES
56 	AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p56
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 56 of 87 --

Table 11. Occupation and Activity Demands
Occupation and activity demands are the components of occupations and activities that occupational therapy practitioners consider in
their professional and clinical reasoning process. Activity demands are what is typically required to carry out the activity regardless of
client and context. Occupation demands are what is required by the specific client (person, group, or population) to carry out an
occupation. Depending on the context and needs of the client, occupation and activity demands can act as barriers to or supports for
participation. Specific knowledge about activity demands assists practitioners in selecting occupations for therapeutic purposes.
Type of Demand
Activity Demands: Typically Required
to Carry Out the Activity
Occupational Demands: Required
by the Client (Person, Group,
or Population) to Carry
Out the Occupation
Relevance and importance 	General meaning of the activity within the
given culture
Meaning the client derives from the oc-
cupation, which may be subjective and
personally constructed; symbolic, un-
conscious, and metaphorical; and aligned
with the client’s goals, values, beliefs, and
needs and perceived utility
Person:
Knitting clothing items for personal use,
for income from sale, or as a leisure
activity
Person:
Knitting as a way to practice mindfulness
strategies for coping with anxiety
Group:
Cooking to provide nutrition, fulfill a family
role, or engage in a leisure activity
Group:
Preparation of a holiday meal with family
to connect members to each other and to
their culture and traditions
Population:
Presence of accessible restrooms in public
spaces in compliance with federal law
Population:
Creation of new accessible and all-gender
restrooms to symbolize a community’s
commitment to safety and inclusion of
members with disabilities and LGBTQ+
members
Objects used and their properties: Tools
(e.g., scissors, dishes, shoes, volleyball),
supplies (e.g., paints, milk, lipstick),
equipment (e.g., workbench, stove, bas-
ketball hoop), and resources (e.g., money,
transportation) required in the process of
carrying out the activity or occupation and
their inherent properties (e.g., heavy,
rough, sharp, colorful, loud, bitter tasting)
Person: Computer workstation that includes a computer, keyboard, mouse, desk,
and chair
Group: Financial and transportation resources for a group of friends to attend a
concert
Population: Tools, supplies, and equipment for flood relief efforts to ensure safety
of people with disabilities
Space demands: Physical environment
requirements of the occupation or activity
(e.g., size, arrangement, surface, lighting,
temperature, noise, humidity, ventilation)
Person: Desk arrangement in an elementary school classroom
Group: Accessible meeting space to run a fall prevention workshop
Population: Noise, lighting, arrangement, and temperature controls for a sensory-
friendly museum
Social demands: Elements of the social
and attitudinal environments required for
the occupation or activity
Person: Rules of engagement for a child at recess
Group: Expectations of travelers in an airport (e.g., waiting in line, following cues
from staff and others, asking questions when needed)
Population: Understanding of the social and political climate of the geographic region
(Continued)
GUIDELINES
AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT 	57
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p57
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 57 of 87 --

Table 11. Occupation and Activity Demands (cont’d)
Type of Demand
Activity Demands: Typically Required
to Carry Out the Activity
Occupational Demands: Required
by the Client (Person, Group,
or Population) to Carry
Out the Occupation
Sequencing and timing demands: Tem-
poral process required to carry out the
activity or occupation (e.g., specific steps,
sequence of steps, timing requirements)
Person: Preferred sequence and timing of a client’s morning routine to affirm social,
cultural, and gender identity
Group: Steps a class of students takes in preparation to start the school day
Population: Public train schedules
Required actions and performance skills:
Actions and performance skills (motor,
process, and social interaction) that are an
inherent part of the activity or occupation
Person: Body movements required to drive a car
Group and population: See “Performance Skills” section for discussion related to
groups and population
Required body functions: “Physiological
functions of body systems (including
psychological functions)” (WHO, 2001, p.
10) required to support the actions used to
perform the activity or occupation
Person: Cognitive level required for a child to play a game
Group and population: See “Client Factors” section for discussion of required body
functions related to groups and populations
Required body structures: “Anatomical
parts of the body such as organs, limbs,
and their components” that support body
functions (WHO, 2001, p. 10) and are
required to perform the activity or
occupation
Person: Presence of upper limbs to play catch
Group and population: See “Client Factors” section for discussion of required body
structures related to groups and populations
Note. WHO = World Health Organization.
GUIDELINES
58 	AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p58
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 58 of 87 --

Table 12. Types of Occupational Therapy Interventions
Occupational therapy intervention types include occupations and activities, interventions to support occupations, education and
training, advocacy, group interventions, and virtual interventions. Occupational therapy interventions facilitate engagement in
occupation to enable persons, groups, and populations to achieve health, well-being, and participation in life. The examples provided
illustrate the types of interventions that clients engage in (denoted as “client”) and that occupational therapy practitioners provide
(denoted as “practitioner”) and are not intended to be all-inclusive.
Intervention Type 	Description 	Examples
Occupations and Activities—Occupations and activities selected as interventions for specific clients are designed to meet
therapeutic goals and address the underlying needs of the client’s mind, body, and spirit. To use occupations and activities
therapeutically, the practitioner considers activity demands and client factors in relation to the client’s therapeutic goals and
contexts.
Occupations 	Broad and specific daily life events that
are personalized and meaningful to the
client
Person
Client completes morning dressing and hy-
giene using adaptive devices.
Group
Client plays a group game of tag on the
playground to improve social participation.
Population
Practitioner creates an app to improve access
for people with autism spectrum disorder
using metropolitan paratransit systems.
Activities 	Components of occupations that are
objective and separate from the client’s
engagement or contexts. Activities as
interventions are selected and designed
to support the development of perfor-
mance skills and performance patterns
to enhance occupational engagement.
Person
Client selects clothing and manipulates
clothing fasteners in advance of dressing.
Group
Group members separate into two teams for a
game of tag.
Population
Client establishes parent volunteer commit-
tees at their children’s school.
Interventions to Support Occupations—Methods and tasks that prepare the client for occupational performance are used as
part of a treatment session in preparation for or concurrently with occupations and activities or provided to a client as a
home-based engagement to support daily occupational performance.
PAMs and mechanical modalities 	Modalities, devices, and techniques to
prepare the client for occupational
performance. Such approaches should
be part of a broader plan and not used
exclusively.
Person
Practitioner administers PAMs to decrease
pain, assist with wound healing or edema
control, or prepare muscles for movement to
enhance occupational performance.
Group
Practitioner develops a reference manual on
postmastectomy manual lymphatic drainage
techniques for implementation at an outpa-
tient facility.
(Continued)
GUIDELINES
AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT 	59
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p59
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 59 of 87 --

Table 12. Types of Occupational Therapy Interventions (cont’d)
Intervention Type 	Description 	Examples
Orthotics and prosthetics 	Construction of devices to mobilize,
immobilize, or support body structures
to enhance participation in occupations
Person
Practitioner fabricates and issues a wrist
orthosis to facilitate movement and enhance
participation in household activities.
Group
Group members participate in a basketball game
with veterans using prosthetics after amputation.
Assistive technology and environ-
mental modifications
Assessment, selection, provision, and
education and training in use of high-
and low-tech assistive technology; ap-
plication of universal design principles;
and recommendations for changes to
the environment or activity to support
the client’s ability to engage in
occupations
Person
Practitioner recommends using a visual
support (e.g., social story) to guide behavior.
Group
Practitioner uses a smart board with speaker
system during a social skills group session to
improve participants’ attention.
Population
Practitioner recommends that a large health
care organization paint exits in their facilities
to resemble bookshelves to deter patients
with dementia from eloping.
Wheeled mobility 	Products and technologies that facilitate
a client’s ability to maneuver through
space, including seating and position-
ing; improve mobility to enhance par-
ticipation in desired daily occupations;
and reduce risk for complications such
as skin breakdown or limb contractures
Person
Practitioner recommends, in conjunction with
the wheelchair team, a sip-and-puff switch to
allow the client to maneuver the power
wheelchair independently and interface with an
environmental control unit in the home.
Group
Group of wheelchair users in the same town
host an educational peer support event.
Self-regulation 	Actions the client performs to target
specific client factors or performance
skills. Intervention approaches may
address sensory processing to promote
emotional stability in preparation for
social participation or work or leisure
activities or executive functioning to
support engagement in occupation and
meaningful activities. Such approaches
involve active participation of the client
and sometimes use of materials to
simulate components of occupations.
Person
Client participates in a fabricated sensory
environment (e.g., through movement, tactile
sensations, scents) to promote alertness
before engaging in a school-based activity.
Group
Practitioner instructs a classroom teacher to
implement mindfulness techniques, visual
imagery, and rhythmic breathing after recess
to enhance students’ success in classroom
activities.
Population
Practitioner consults with businesses and
community sites to establish sensory-friendly
environments for people with sensory pro-
cessing deficits.
(Continued)
GUIDELINES
60 	AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p60
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 60 of 87 --

Table 12. Types of Occupational Therapy Interventions (cont’d)
Intervention Type 	Description 	Examples
Education and Training
Education 	Imparting of knowledge and information
about occupation, health, well-being,
and participation to enable the client to
acquire helpful behaviors, habits, and
routines
Person
Practitioner provides education regarding
home and activity modifications to the spouse
or family member of a person with dementia to
support maximum independence.
Group
Practitioner participates in a team care
planning meeting to educate the family and
team members on a patient’s condition and
level of function and establish a plan of care.
Population
Practitioner educates town officials about the
value of and strategies for constructing
walking and biking paths accessible to people
who use mobility devices.
Training 	Facilitation of the acquisition of concrete
skills for meeting specific goals in a real-
life, applied situation. In this case, skills
refers to measurable components of
function that enable mastery. Training is
differentiated from education by its goal
of enhanced performance as opposed to
enhanced understanding, although
these goals often go hand in hand
(Collins & O’Brien, 2003).
Person
Practitioner instructs the client in the use of
coping skills such as deep breathing to ad-
dress anxiety symptoms before engaging in
social interaction.
Group
Practitioner provides an in-service on ap-
plying new reimbursement and practice
standards adopted by a facility.
Population
Practitioner develops a training program to
support practice guidelines addressing oc-
cupational deprivation and cultural compe-
tence for practitioners working with refugees.
Advocacy—Efforts directed toward promoting occupational justice and empowering clients to seek and obtain resources to
support health, well-being, and occupational participation.
Advocacy 	Advocacy efforts undertaken by the
practitioner
Person
Practitioner collaborates with a client to procure
reasonable accommodations at a work site.
Group
Practitioner collaborates with and educates
teachers in an elementary school about in-
clusive classroom design.
Population
Practitioner serves on the policy board of an
organization to procure supportive housing
accommodations for people with disabilities.
(Continued)
GUIDELINES
AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT 	61
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p61
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 61 of 87 --

Table 12. Types of Occupational Therapy Interventions (cont’d)
Intervention Type 	Description 	Examples
Self-advocacy 	Advocacy efforts undertaken by the
client with support by the practitioner
Person
Client requests reasonable accommodations,
such as audio textbooks, to support their
learning disability.
Group
Client participates in an employee meeting to
request and procure adjustable chairs to
improve comfort at computer workstations.
Population
Client participates on a student committee
partnering with school administration to
develop cyberbullying prevention programs
in their district.
Group Interventions—Use of distinct knowledge of the dynamics of group and social interaction and leadership techniques to
facilitate learning and skill acquisition across the lifespan. Groups are used as a method of service delivery.
Functional groups, activity groups,
task groups, social groups, and other
groups
Groups used in health care settings,
within the community, or within orga-
nizations that allow clients to explore
and develop skills for participation, in-
cluding basic social interaction skills
and tools for self-regulation, goal set-
ting, and positive choice making
Person
Client participates in a group for adults with
traumatic brain injury focused on individual
goals for reentering the community after
inpatient treatment.
Group
Group of older adults participates in volunteer
days to maintain participation in the com-
munity through shared goals.
Population
Practitioner works with middle school
teachers in a district on approaches to ad-
dress issues of self-efficacy and self-esteem
as the basis for creating resiliency in children
at risk for being bullied.
Virtual Interventions—Use of simulated, real-time, and near-time technologies for service delivery absent of physical contact,
such as telehealth or mHealth.
Telehealth (telecommunication and
information technology) and mHealth
(mobile telephone application
technology)
Use of technology such as video con-
ferencing, teleconferencing, or mobile
telephone application technology to
plan, implement, and evaluate occupa-
tional therapy intervention, education,
and consultation
Person
Practitioner performs a telehealth therapy
session with a client living in a rural area.
Group
Client participates in an initial online support
group session to establish group protocols,
procedures, and roles.
Population
Practitioner develops methods and standards
for mHealth in community occupational
therapy practice.
Note. mHealth = mobile health; PAMs = physical agent modalities.
GUIDELINES
62 	AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p62
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 62 of 87 --

Table 13. Approaches to Intervention
Approaches to intervention are specific strategies selected to direct the evaluation and intervention processes on the basis of the
client’s desired outcomes, evaluation data, and research evidence. Approaches inform the selection of practice models, frames of
references, and treatment theories.
Approach 	Description 	Examples
Create, promote (health promotion) 	An intervention approach that does not
assume a disability is present or that any
aspect would interfere with performance.
This approach is designed to provide
enriched contextual and activity experi-
ences that will enhance performance for all
people in the natural contexts of life
(adapted from Dunn et al., 1998, p. 534).
Person
Develop a fatigue management program
for a client recently diagnosed with
multiple sclerosis
Group
Create a resource list of developmentally
appropriate toys to be distributed by staff
at a day care program
Population
Develop a falls prevention curriculum for
older adults for trainings at senior centers
and day centers
Establish, restore (remediation,
restoration)
Approach designed to change client vari-
ables to establish a skill or ability that has
not yet developed or to restore a skill or
ability that has been impaired (adapted
from Dunn et al., 1998, p. 533)
Person
Restore a client’s upper extremity
movement to enable transfer of dishes
from the dishwasher into the upper
kitchen cabinets
Collaborate with a client to help establish
morning routines needed to arrive at
school or work on time
Group
Educate staff of a group home for clients
with serious mental illness to develop a
structured schedule, chunking tasks to
decrease residents’ risk of being over-
whelmed by the many responsibilities of
daily life roles
Population
Restore access ramps to a church en-
trance after a hurricane
Maintain 	Approach designed to provide supports
that will allow clients to preserve the
performance capabilities that they have
regained and that continue to meet their
occupational needs. The assumption is
that without continued maintenance in-
tervention, performance would decrease
and occupational needs would not be met,
thereby affecting health, well-being, and
quality of life.
Person
Provide ongoing intervention for a client
with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis to ad-
dress participation in desired occupations
through provision of assistive technology
Group
Maintain environmental modifications at
a group home for young adults with
physical disabilities for continued safety
and engagement with housemates
(Continued)
GUIDELINES
AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT 	63
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p63
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 63 of 87 --

Table 13. Approaches to Intervention (cont’d)
Approach 	Description 	Examples
Population
Maintain safe and independent access for
people with low vision by increasing
hallway lighting in a community center
Modify (compensation, adaptation) 	Approach directed at “finding ways to
revise the current context or activity de-
mands to support performance in the
natural setting, [including] compensatory
techniques . . . [such as] enhancing some
features to provide cues or reducing other
features to reduce distractibility” (Dunn
et al., 1998, p. 533)
Person
Simplify task sequence to help a person
with cognitive impairments complete a
morning self-care routine
Group
Modify a college campus housing build-
ing to accommodate a group of students
with mobility impairments
Population
Consult with architects and builders to
design homes that will support aging in
place and use universal design principles
Prevent (disability prevention) 	Approach designed to address the needs
of clients with or without a disability who
are at risk for occupational performance
problems. This approach is designed to
prevent the occurrence or evolution of
barriers to performance in context. Inter-
ventions may be directed at client, context,
or activity variables (adapted from Dunn
et al., 1998, p. 534).
Person
Aid in the prevention of illicit substance
use by introducing self-initiated routine
strategies that support drug-free behavior
Group
Prevent social isolation of employees by
promoting participation in after-work
group activities
Population
Consult with a hotel chain to provide an
ergonomics educational program
designed to prevent back injuries in
housekeeping staff
GUIDELINES
64 	AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p64
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 64 of 87 --

Table 14. Outcomes
Outcomes are the end result of the occupational therapy process; they describe what clients can achieve through occupational therapy
intervention. Some outcomes are measurable and are used for intervention planning and review and discharge planning. These
outcomes reflect the attainment of treatment goals that relate to engagement in occupation. Other outcomes are experienced by clients
when they have realized the effects of engagement in occupation and are able to return to desired habits, routines, roles, and rituals.
Adaptation is embedded in all categories of outcomes. The examples listed specify how the broad outcome of health and participation in
life may be operationalized.
Outcome Category 	Description 	Examples
Occupational performance 	Act of doing and accomplishing a selected
action (performance skill), activity, or oc-
cupation (Fisher, 2009; Fisher & Griswold,
2019; Kielhofner, 2008) that results from
the dynamic transaction among the client,
the context, and the activity. Improving or
enhancing skills and patterns in occupa-
tional performance leads to engagement in
occupations or activities (adapted in part
from Law et al., 1996, p. 16).
Person
A patient with hip precautions showers safely with
modified independence using a tub transfer
bench and a long-handled sponge.
Group
A group of older adults cooks a holiday meal
during their stay in a skilled nursing facility with
minimal assistance from staff.
Population
A community welcomes children with spina bifida
in public settings after a news story featuring
occupational therapy practitioners.
Improvement 	Increased occupational performance
through adaptation when a performance
limitation is present
Person
A child with autism plays interactively with a peer.
An older adult returns home from a skilled
nursing facility as desired.
Group
Back strain in nursing personnel decreases as a
result of an in-service education program on body
mechanics for job duties that require bending and
lifting.
Population
Accessible playground facilities for all children are
constructed in city parks.
Enhancement 	Development of performance skills and
performance patterns that augment exist-
ing performance of life occupations when a
performance limitation is not present
Person
A teenage mother experiences increased confidence
and competence in parenting as a result of struc-
tured social groups and child development classes.
Group
Membership in the local senior citizen center
increases as a result of expanded social wellness
and exercise programs.
School staff have increased ability to address and
manage school-age youth violence as a result of
conflict resolution training to address bullying.
Population
Older adults have increased opportunities to
participate in community activities through ride-
share programs.
(Continued)
GUIDELINES
AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT 	65
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p65
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 65 of 87 --

Table 14. Outcomes (cont’d)
Outcome Category 	Description 	Examples
Prevention 	Education or health promotion efforts
designed to identify, reduce, or stop the
onset and reduce the incidence of un-
healthy conditions, risk factors, diseases,
or injuries. Occupational therapy promotes
a healthy lifestyle at the individual, group,
population (societal), and government or
policy level (adapted from AOTA, 2020b).
Person
A child with orthopedic impairments is provided
with appropriate seating and a play area.
Group
A program of leisure and educational activities is
implemented at a drop-in center for adults with
serious mental illness.
Population
Access to occupational therapy services is pro-
vided in underserved areas where residents
typically receive other services.
Health and wellness 	Health: State of physical, mental, and social
well-being, as well as a positive concept
emphasizing social and personal resources
and physical capacities (WHO, 1986).
Health for groups and populations also
includes social responsibility of members
to the group or population as a whole.
Wellness: “Active process through which
individuals [or groups or populations]
become aware of and make choices toward
a more successful existence” (Hettler, 1984,
p. 1117). Wellness is more than a lack of
disease symptoms; it is a state of mental
and physical balance and fitness (adapted
from “Wellness,” 1997, p. 2110)
Person
A person with a mental health challenge partici-
pates in an empowerment and advocacy group to
improve services in the community.
A person with attention deficit hyperactivity dis-
order demonstrates self-management through the
ability to manage the various aspects of their life.
Group
A company-wide program for employees is
implemented to identify problems and solutions
regarding the balance among work, leisure, and
family life.
Population
The incidence of childhood obesity decreases.
Quality of life 	Dynamic appraisal of the client’s life sat-
isfaction (perceptions of progress toward
goals), hope (real or perceived belief that
one can move toward a goal through se-
lected pathways), self-concept (composite
of beliefs and feelings about oneself),
health and functioning (e.g., health status,
self-care capabilities), and socioeconomic
factors (e.g., vocation, education, income;
adapted from Radomski, 1995)
Person
A deaf child from a hearing family participates
fully and actively during a recreational activity.
Group
A facility experiences increased participation of
residents during outings and independent travel
as a result of independent living skills training for
care providers.
Population
A lobby is formed to support opportunities for
social networking, advocacy activities, and
sharing of scientific information for stroke sur-
vivors and their families.
(Continued)
GUIDELINES
66 	AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p66
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 66 of 87 --

Table 14. Outcomes (cont’d)
Outcome Category 	Description 	Examples
Participation 	Engagement in desired occupations in
ways that are personally satisfying and
congruent with expectations within the
culture
Person
A person recovers the ability to perform the es-
sential duties of his or her job after a flexor tendon
laceration.
Group
A family enjoys a vacation spent traveling cross-
country in their adapted van.
Population
All children within a state have access to school
sports programs.
Role competence 	Ability to effectively meet the demands of
the roles in which one engages
Person
A person with cerebral palsy is able to take notes
and type papers to meet the demands of the
student role.
Group
A factory implements job rotation to allow sharing
of higher demand tasks so employees can meet
the demands of the worker role.
Population
Accessibility of polling places is improved,
enabling all people with disabilities in the
community to meet the demands of the citizen
role.
Well-being 	Contentment with one’s health, self-es-
teem, sense of belonging, security, and
opportunities for self-determination,
meaning, roles, and helping others
(Hammell, 2009). Well-being is “a general
term encompassing the total universe of
human life domains, including physical,
mental, and social aspects, that make up
what can be called a ‘good life’” (WHO,
2006, p. 211).
Person
A person with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
achieves contentment with their ability to find
meaning in fulfilling the role of parent through
compensatory strategies and environmental
modifications.
Group
Members of an outpatient depression and anxiety
support group feel secure in their sense of group
belonging and ability to help other members.
Population
Residents of a town celebrate the groundbreaking
for a school being reconstructed after a natural
disaster.
(Continued)
GUIDELINES
AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT 	67
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p67
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 67 of 87 --

References
American Occupational Therapy Association. (1979). Occupational therapy
product output reporting system and uniform terminology for reporting
occupational therapy services. (Available from pracdept@aota.org)
American Occupational Therapy Association. (1989). Uniform terminology
for occupational therapy—Second edition. American Journal of Occu-
pational Therapy, 43, 808–815. https://doi.org/10.5014/ajot.43.12.808
American Occupational Therapy Association. (1994). Uniform terminology
for occupational therapy—Third edition. American Journal of Occupa-
tional Therapy, 48, 1047–1054. https://doi.org/10.5014/ajot.48.11.1047
American Occupational Therapy Association. (2002a). Occupational therapy
practice framework: Domain and process. American Journal of Occupa-
tional Therapy, 56, 609–639. https://doi.org/10.5014/ajot.56.6.609
American Occupational Therapy Association. (2002b). Position paper:
Broadening the construct of independence. American Journal of Oc-
cupational Therapy, 56, 660. https://doi.org/10.5014/ajot.56.6.660
American Occupational Therapy Association. (2008). Occupational therapy
practice framework: Domain and process (2nd ed.). American Journal
of Occupational Therapy, 62, 625–683. https://doi.org/10.5014/ajot.62.6.625
American Occupational Therapy Association. (2011). Definition of occupa-
tional therapy practice for the AOTA Model Practice Act. Retrieved from
http://www.aota.org/∼/media/Corporate/Files/Advocacy/State/
Resources/PracticeAct/Model%20Definition%20of%20OT%20Practice
%20%20Adopted%2041411.pdf
American Occupational Therapy Association. (2014). Occupational therapy
practice framework: Domain and process (3rd ed.). American Journal of
Occupational Therapy, 68(Suppl. 1), S1–S48. https://doi.org/10.5014/ajot.
2014.682006
American Occupational Therapy Association. (2015a). Occupational therapy
code of ethics (2015). American Journal of Occupational Therapy,
69 (Suppl. 3), 6913410030. https://doi.org/10.5014/ajot.2015.696S03
American Occupational Therapy Association. (2015b). Policy A.23: Cate-
gories of occupational therapy personnel and students. In Policy manual
(2017 ed., pp. 26–27). Bethesda, MD: Author.
American Occupational Therapy Association. (2015c). Standards of practice
for occupational therapy. American Journal of Occupational Therapy,
69 (Suppl. 3), 6913410057. https://doi.org/10.5014/ajot.2015.696S06
American Occupational Therapy Association. (2017a). AOTA occupational
profile template. American Journal of Occupational Therapy, 71(Suppl.
2), 7112420030. https://doi.org/10.5014/ajot.2017.716S12
American Occupational Therapy Association. (2017b). AOTA’s societal statement
on disaster response and risk reduction. American Journal of Occupational
Therapy, 71(Suppl. 2), 6913410057. https://10.5014/ajot.2017.716S11
American Occupation Therapy Association. (2017c). Occupational therapy’s
role in medication management. American Journal of Occupational Ther-
apy, 71(Suppl. 2), 7112410025. https://doi.org/10.5014/ajot.2017.716S02
American Occupational Therapy Association. (2018a). Guidelines for documen-
tation of occupational therapy. American Journal of Occupational Therapy,
72 (Suppl. 2), 7212410010. https://doi.org/10.5014/ajot.2018.72S203
American Occupational Therapy Association. (2018b). Occupational therapy’s role
in case management. American Journal of Occupational Therapy, 72 (Suppl.
2), 7212410050. https://doi.org/10.5014/ajot.2018.72S206
American Occupational Therapy Association. (2018c). Telehealth in occu-
pational therapy. American Journal of Occupational Therapy, 72 (Suppl.
2), 7212410059. https://doi.org/10.5014/ajot.2018.72S219
Table 14. Outcomes (cont’d)
Outcome Category 	Description 	Examples
Occupational justice 	Access to and participation in the full range
of meaningful and enriching occupations
afforded to others, including opportunities
for social inclusion and resources to par-
ticipate in occupations to satisfy personal,
health, and societal needs (adapted from
Townsend & Wilcock, 2004)
Person
An individual with intellectual and developmental
disabilities serves on an advisory board to es-
tablish programs to be offered by a community
recreation center.
Group
Workers have enough break time to eat lunch with
their young children in the day care center.
Group and Population
People with persistent mental illness experience
an increased sense of empowerment and self-
advocacy skills, enabling them to develop an
antistigma campaign promoting engagement in
the civic arena (group) and alternative adapted
housing options for older adults to age in place
(population).
Note. AOTA = American Occupational Therapy Association; WHO = World Health Organization.
GUIDELINES
68 	AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p68
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 68 of 87 --

American Occupational Therapy Association. (2020a). Guidelines for su-
pervision, roles, and responsibilities during the delivery of occupational
therapy services. American Journal of Occupational Therapy, 74(Suppl.
3), 7413410020. https://doi.org/10.5014/ajot.2020.74S3004
American Occupational Therapy Association. (2020b). Occupational therapy in
the promotion of health and well-being. American Journal of Occupational
Therapy, 74, 7403420010. https://doi.org/10.5014/ajot.2020.743003
American Occupational Therapy Association. (2020c). Occupational therapy’s
commitment to diversity, equity, and inclusion. American Journal of Occupational
Therapy, 74(Suppl. 3), 7413410030. https://doi.org/10.5014/ajot.2020.74S3002.
Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990, Pub. L. 101-336, 42 U.S.C. § 12101.
Asher, I. E. (Ed.). (2014). Asher’s occupational therapy assessment tools (4th
ed.). Bethesda, MD: AOTA Press.
Bandura, A. (1986). Social foundations of thought and action: A social
cognitive theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Bedell, G. M. (2012). Measurement of social participation. In V. Anderson &
M. H. Beauchamp (Eds.), Developmental social neuroscience and childhood
brain insult: Theory and practice (pp. 184–206). New York: Guilford Press.
Belief. (2020). In Merriam-Webster. https://www.merriam-webster.com/
dictionary/belief
Bergen, D. (Ed.). (1988). Play as a medium for learning and development: A
handbook of theory and practice. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.
Billock, C. (2005). Delving into the center: Women’s lived experience of
spirituality through occupation (Publication No. AAT 3219812) [Doctoral
dissertation, University of Southern California]. Available from ProQuest
Dissertations and Theses Global.
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. (2019). Bundled Payments for
Care Improvement (BPCI) initiative: General information. Retrieved from
https://innovation.cms.gov/initiatives/bundled-payments
Christiansen, C. H., & Baum, M. C. (Eds.). (1997). Occupational therapy:
Enabling function and well-being. Thorofare, NJ: Slack.
Christiansen, C., Baum, M. C., & Bass-Haugen, J. (Eds.). (2005). Occupational
therapy: Performance, participation, and well-being. Thorofare, NJ: Slack.
Christiansen, C. H., & Hammecker, C. L. (2001). Self care. In B. R. Bonder &
M. B. Wagner (Eds.), Functional performance in older adults (pp.
155–175). Philadelphia: F. A. Davis.
Christiansen, C. H., & Townsend, E. A. (2010). Introduction to occupation:
The art and science of living (2nd ed.). Cranbury, NJ: Pearson Education.
Clark, F. A. (2000). The concept of habit and routine: A preliminary theoretical
synthesis. OTJR: Occupation, Participation and Health, 20(Suppl. 1),
123S–137S. https://doi.org/10.1177/15394492000200S114
Cohn, E. S. (2001). Parent perspectives of occupational therapy using a
sensory integration approach. American Journal of Occupational Ther-
apy, 55, 285–294. https://doi.org/10.5014/ajot.55.3.285
Cohn, E. S. (2019). Asserting our competence and affirming the value of
occupation with confidence. American Journal of Occupational Therapy,
73, 7306150010. https://doi.org/10.5014/ajot.2019.736002
Cohn, E., Miller, L. J., & Tickle-Degnen, L. (2000). Parental hopes for therapy
outcomes: Children with sensory modulation disorders. American Journal of
Occupational Therapy, 54, 36–43. https://doi.org/10.5014/ajot.54.1.36
Cole, B., & McLean, V. (2003). Therapeutic relationships redefined. Occupational
Therapy in Mental Health, 19, 33–56. https://doi.org/10.1300/J004v19n02_03
Collins, J., & O’Brien, N. P. (2003). Greenwood dictionary of education.
Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
Cornerstone. (n.d.). In Cambridge Dictionary. Retrieved from https://
dictionary.cambridge.org/us/dictionary/english/cornerstone
Dennis, C. W., Dorsey, J. A., & Gitlow, L. (2015). A call for sustainable
practice in occupational therapy. Canadian Journal of Occupational
Therapy, 82, 160–168. https://doi.org/10.1177/0008417414566925
Dickie, V., Cutchin, M., & Humphry, R. (2006). Occupation as transactional experi-
ence: A critique of individualism in occupational science. Journal of Occupational
Science, 13, 83–93. https://doi.org/10.1080/14427591.2006.9686573
Dorsey, J., Ehrenfried, H., Finch, D., & Jaegers, L. (2019). Work. In B. A. B.
Schell & G. Gillen (Eds.), Willard and Spackman’s occupational therapy
(13th ed., pp. 779–804). Philadelphia: Wolters Kluwer.
Doucet, B. M., & Gutman, S. A. (2013). Quantifying function: The rest of the
measurement story. American Journal of Occupational Therapy, 67, 7–9.
https://doi.org/10.5014/ajot.2013.007096
Dunlea, A. (1996). An opportunity for co-adaptation: The experience of mothers
and their infants who are blind. In R. Zemke & F. Clark (Eds.), Occupational
science: The evolving discipline (pp. 227–342). Philadelphia: F. A. Davis.
Dunn, W. W. (2000). Habit: What’s the brain got to do with it? OTJR: Oc-
cupation, Participation and Health, 20(Suppl. 1), 6S–20S. https://doi.org/
10.1177/15394492000200S102
Dunn, W., McClain, L. H., Brown, C., & Youngstrom, M. J. (1998). The ecology
of human performance. In M. E. Neistadt & E. B. Crepeau (Eds.), Willard
and Spackman’s occupational therapy (9th ed., pp. 525–535). Phila-
delphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Dunton, W. R. (1934). The need for and value of research in occupational
therapy. Occupational Therapy and Rehabilitation, 13, 325–328.
Eberle, S. G. (2014). The elements of play: Toward a philosophy and a
definition of play. American Journal of Play, 6, 214–233.
Edgelow, M., & Krupa, T. (2011). Randomized controlled pilot study of an
occupational time-use intervention for people with serious mental illness.
American Journal of Occupational Therapy, 65, 267–276. https://doi.org/
10.5014/ajot.2011.001313
Eklund, M., Orban, K., Argentzell, E., Bejerholm, U., Tj¨ornstrand, C., Erlandsson, L.
K., & H˚akansson, C. (2017). The linkage between patterns of daily occupations
and occupational balance: Applications within occupational science and
occupational therapy practice. Scandinavian Journal of Occupational Therapy,
24, 41–56. https://doi.org/10.1080/11038128.2016.1224271
Esdaile, S. A., & Olson, J. A. (2004). Mothering occupations: Challenge,
agency, and participation. Philadelphia: F. A. Davis.
Fiese, B. H. (2007). Routines and rituals: Opportunities for participation in
family health. OTJR: Occupation, Participation and Health, 27(Suppl. 1),
41S–49S. https://doi.org/10.1177/15394492070270S106
Fiese, B. H., Tomcho, T. J., Douglas, M., Josephs, K., Poltrock, S., &
Baker, T. (2002). A review of 50 years of research on naturally oc-
curring family routines and rituals: Cause for celebration. Journal of Family
Psychology, 16, 381–390. https://doi.org/10.1037/0893-3200.16.4.381
Fisher, A. G. (2009). Occupational Therapy Intervention Process Model: A
model for planning and implementing top-down, client-centered, and
occupation-based interventions. Fort Collins, CO: Three Star Press.
Fisher, A. G., & Griswold, L. A. (2019). Performance skills: Implementing
performance analyses to evaluate quality of occupational performance.
In B. A. B. Schell & G. Gillen (Eds.), Willard and Spackman’s occupational
therapy (13th ed., pp. 335–350). Philadelphia: Wolters Kluwer.
GUIDELINES
AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT 	69
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p69
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 69 of 87 --

Fisher, A. G., & Marterella, A. (2019). Powerful practice: A model for authentic
occupational therapy. Fort Collins, CO: Center for Innovative OT Solutions.
Framework. (2020). In American Heritage dictionary of the English language (5th
ed.). Retrieved from https://ahdictionary.com/word/search.html?q=framework
Gillen, G. (2013). A fork in the road: An occupational hazard. American Journal of
Occupational Therapy, 67, 641–652. https://doi.org/10.5014/ajot.2013.676002
Gillen, G., Hunter, E. G., Lieberman, D., & Stutzbach, M. (2019). AOTA’s top 5
Choosing Wisely® recommendations. American Journal of Occupational
Therapy, 73, 7302420010. https://doi.org/10.5014/ajot.2019.732001
Gillen, G., & Schell, B. A. B. (2019). Introduction to evaluation, intervention,
and outcomes for occupations. In B. A. B. Schell & G. Gillen (Eds.),
Willard and Spackman’s occupational therapy (13th ed., pp. 710–713).
Philadelphia: Wolters Kluwer.
Gitlin, L. N., & Corcoran, M. A. (2005). Occupational therapy and dementia
care: The Home Environmental Skill-Building Program for individuals and
families. Bethesda, MD: AOTA Press.
Gitlin, L. N., Corcoran, M., Winter, L., Boyce, A., & Hauck, W. W. (2001). A
randomized, controlled trial of a home environmental intervention: Effect
on efficacy and upset in caregivers and on daily function of persons with
dementia. Gerontologist, 41, 4–14. https://doi.org/10.1093/geront/41.1.4
Gitlin, L. N., Winter, L., Burke, J., Chernett, N., Dennis, M. P., & Hauck, W. W.
(2008). Tailored activities to manage neuropsychiatric behaviors in
persons with dementia and reduce caregiver burden: A randomized pilot
study. American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 16, 229–239. https://doi.
org/10.1097/01.JGP.0000300629.35408.94
Gitlin, L. N., Winter, L., Corcoran, M., Dennis, M. P., Schinfeld, S., & Hauck, W. W.
(2003). Effects of the home environmental skill-building program on the
caregiver–care recipient dyad: 6-month outcomes from the Philadelphia REACH
Initiative. Gerontologist, 43, 532–546. https://doi.org/10.1093/geront/43.4.532
Graff, M. J., Vernooij-Dassen, M. J., Thijssen, M., Dekker, J., Hoefnagels,
W. H., & Olderikkert, M. G. (2007). Effects of community occupational
therapy on quality of life, mood, and health status in dementia patients
and their caregivers: A randomized controlled trial. Journals of Geron-
tology, Series A: Biological Sciences and Medical Sciences, 62,
1002–1009. https://doi.org/10.1093/gerona/62.9.1002
Graham, F., Rodger, S., & Ziviani, J. (2013). Effectiveness of occupational
performance coaching in improving children’s and mothers’ performance
and mothers’ self-competence. American Journal of Occupational
Therapy, 67, 10–18. https://doi.org/10.5014/ajot.2013.004648
Grajo, L. (2019). Theory of occupational adaptation. In B. A. B. Schell & G.
Gillen (Eds.), Willard and Spackman’s occupational therapy (13th ed.,
pp. 633–642). Philadelphia: Wolters Kluwer.
Hall, J. (2017). Gender of friend. In T. K. Shackelford & V. A. Weekes-
Shackelford (Eds.), Encyclopedia of evolutionary psychological science.
Berlin: Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-16999-6_1600-1
Hammell, K. R. W. (2013). Occupation, well-being, and culture: Theory and
cultural humility. Canadian Journal of Occupational Therapy, 80,
224–234. https://doi.org/10.1177/0008417413500465
Hammell, K. W. (2009). Self-care, productivity, and leisure, or dimensions of
occupational experience? Rethinking occupational “categories.” Cana-
dian Journal of Occupational Therapy, 76, 107–114. https://doi.org/10.
1177/000841740907600208
Hanna, K., & Rodger, S. (2002). Towards family-centred practice in pae-
diatric occupational therapy: A review of the literature on parent–therapist
collaboration. Australian Occupational Therapy Journal, 49, 14–24.
https://doi.org/10.1046/j.0045-0766.2001.00273.x
Hettler, W. (1984). Wellness—The lifetime goal of a university experience. In
J. D. Matarazzo, S. M. Weiss, J. A. Herd, N. E. Miller, & S. M. Weiss (Eds.),
Behavioral health: A handbook of health enhancement and disease
prevention (pp. 1117–1124). New York: Wiley.
Hildenbrand, W. C., & Lamb, A. J. (2013). Occupational therapy in prevention and
wellness: Retaining relevance in a new health care world. American Journal of
Occupational Therapy, 67, 266–271. https://doi.org/10.5014/ajot.2013.673001
Hinojosa, J., & Kramer, P. (Eds.). (2014). Evaluation in occupational therapy
(4th ed.). Bethesda, MD: AOTA Press.
Hinojosa, J., Kramer, P., & Crist, P. (2014). Evaluation: Where do we
begin? In J. Hinojosa & P. Kramer (Eds.), Evaluation in occupational
therapy: Obtaining and interpreting data (4th ed., pp. 1–18).
Bethesda, MD: AOTA Press.
Hinojosa, J., Kramer, P., Royeen, C. B., & Luebben, A. J. (2017). The core
concept of occupation. In J. Hinojosa, P. Kramer, & C. Royeen (Eds.),
Perspectives on human occupations: Theories underlying practice
(pp. 23–39). Philadelphia: F. A. Davis.
Hooper, B., & Wood, W. (2019). The philosophy of occupational therapy: A
framework for practice. In B. A. B. Schell & G. Gillen (Eds.), Willard and
Spackman’s occupational therapy (13th ed., pp. 43–55). Philadelphia:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Humbert, T. K. (2016). Addressing spirituality in occupational therapy. In T. K.
Humbert (Ed.), Spirituality and occupational therapy: A model for practice
and research. Bethesda, MD: AOTA Press.
Individuals With Disabilities Education Improvement Act of 2004, Pub. L. 108-
446, 20 U.S.C. § 1400 et seq.
Joint Commission. (2012). Transitions of care: The need for a more effective
approach to continuing patient care (Hot Topics in Health Care). Re-
trieved from https://www.jointcommission.org/assets/1/18/Hot_Topics_
Transitions_of_Care.pdf
Joint Commission. (2013). Transitions of care: The need for collaboration across
entire care continuum (Hot Topics in Health Care). Retrieved from https://
www.jointcommission.org/sitecore/media-library/deprecated-unorganized/
imported-assets/tjc/system-folders/assetmanager/toc_hot_topicspdf/
Khetani, M. A., & Coster, W. (2019). Social participation. In B. A. B. Schell & G.
Gillen (Eds.), Willard and Spackman’s occupational therapy (13th ed.,
pp. 847–860). Philadelphia: Wolters Kluwer.
Kielhofner, G. (2008). The Model of Human Occupation: Theory and ap-
plication (4th ed.). Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Koome, F., Hocking, C., & Sutton, D. (2012). Why routines matter: The nature
and meaning of family routine in the context of adolescent mental illness.
Journal of Occupational Science, 19, 312–325. https://doi.org/10.1080/
14427591.2012.718245
Larson, E. A., & Zemke, R. (2003). Shaping the temporal patterns of our lives:
The social coordination of occupation. Journal of Occupational Science,
10, 80–89. https://doi.org/10.1080/14427591.2003.9686514
Law, M., Baum, M. C., & Dunn, W. (2005). Measuring occupational perfor-
mance: Supporting best practice in occupational therapy (2nd ed.).
Thorofare, NJ: Slack.
GUIDELINES
70 	AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p70
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 70 of 87 --

Law, M., Cooper, B., Strong, S., Stewart, D., Rigby, P., & Letts, L. (1996).
Person–Environment–Occupation Model: A transactive approach to
occupational performance. Canadian Journal of Occupational Therapy,
63, 9–23. https://doi.org/10.1177/000841749606300103
Lawlor, M. C., & Mattingly, C. (2019). Family perspectives on occupation, health,
and disability. In B. A. B. Schell & G. Gillen (Eds.), Willard and Spackman’s
occupational therapy (13th ed., pp. 196–211). Philadelphia: Wolters Kluwer.
Lynch, H., Hayes, N., & Ryan, S. (2016). Exploring socio-cultural influences
on infant play occupations in Irish home environments. Journal of Oc-
cupational Science, 23, 352–369. https://doi.org/10.1080/14427591.
2015.1080181
Magasi, S., & Hammel, J. (2004). Social support and social network mobili-
zation in African American woman who have experienced strokes. Dis-
ability Studies Quarterly, 24 (4). https://doi.org/10.18061/dsq.v24i4.878
Matuska, K., & Barrett, K. (2019). Patterns of occupations. In B. A. B. Schell &
G. Gillen (Eds.), Willard and Spackman’s occupational therapy (13th ed.,
pp. 212–220). Philadelphia: Wolters Kluwer.
McElroy, T., Muyinda, H., Atim, S., Spittal, P., & Backman, C. L. (2012). War, dis-
placement and productive occupations in northern Uganda. Journal of Occu-
pational Science, 19, 198–212. https://doi.org/10.1080/14427591.2011.614681
Meyer, A. (1922). The philosophy of occupational therapy. Archives of
Occupational Therapy, 1, 1–10.
Mosey, A. C. (1996). Applied scientific inquiry in the health professions: An
epistemological orientation (2nd ed.). Bethesda, MD: American Occu-
pational Therapy Association.
Moyers, P. A. (1999). The guide to occupational therapy practice. American Journal
of Occupational Therapy, 53, 247–322. https://doi.org/10.5014/ajot.53.3.247
National Quality Forum. (n.d). Patient-reported outcomes. Retrieved from
https://www.qualityforum.org/Projects/n-r/Patient-Reported_Outcomes/
Patient-Reported_Outcomes.aspx
Nilsson, I., & Townsend, E. (2010). Occupational justice—Bridging theory
and practice. Scandinavian Journal of Occupational Therapy, 17, 57–63.
https://doi.org/10.3109/11038120903287182
Nurit, W., & Michal, A. B. (2003). Rest: A qualitative exploration of the phenomenon.
Occupational Therapy International, 10, 227–238. https://doi.org/10.1002/oti.187
Olson, J. A. (2004). Mothering co-occupations in caring for infants and young
children. In S. A. Esdaile & J. A. Olson (Eds.), Mothering occupations
(pp. 28–51). Philadelphia: F. A. Davis.
Orentlicher, M., Schefkind, S., & Gibson, R. (Eds.). (2015). Transitions across the
lifespan: An occupational therapy approach. Bethesda, MD: AOTA Press.
Parham, L. D., & Fazio, L. S. (Eds.). (1997). Play in occupational therapy for
children. St. Louis: Mosby.
Pickens, N., & Pizur-Barnekow, K. (2009). Co-occupation: Extending the
dialogue. Journal of Occupational Science, 16, 151–156. https://doi.org/
10.1080/14427591.2009.9686656
Piersol, C. V., Canton, K., Connor, S. E., Giller, I., Lipman, S., & Sager,
S. (2017). Effectiveness of interventions for caregivers of people
with Alzheimer’s disease and related major neurocognitive disorders:
A systematic review. American Journal of Occupational
Therapy, 71, 7105180020. https://doi.org/10.5014/ajot.2017.027581
Primeau, L. (2000). Divisions of household work, routines, and child occu-
pations in families. Journal of Occupational Science, 7, 19–28. https://doi.
org/10.1080/14427591.2000.9686461
Provision of EHB, 45 C.F.R. §156.115(a)(5)(i) (2015). https://www.law.cornell.
edu/cfr/text/45/156.115
Radomski, M. V. (1995). There is more to life than putting on your pants.
American Journal of Occupational Therapy, 49, 487–490. https://doi.org/
10.5014/ajot.49.6.487
Robinson Johnson, K., & Dickie, V. (2019). What is occupation? In B. A. B.
Schell & G. Gillen (Eds.), Willard and Spackman’s occupational therapy
(13th ed., pp. 320–333). Philadelphia: Wolters Kluwer.
Rogers, A. T., Bai, G., Lavin, R. A., & Anderson, G. F. (2017). Higher hospital
spending on occupational therapy is associated with lower readmission
rates. Medical Care Research and Review, 74, 668–686. https://doi.org/
10.1177/1077558716666981
Rogers, J. C., & Holm, M. B. (1994). Assessment of self-care. In B. R. Bonder
& M. B. Wagner (Eds.), Functional performance in older adults
(pp. 181–202). Philadelphia: F. A. Davis.
Scaffa, M. (2019). Occupational therapy interventions for groups, communities,
and populations. In B. A. B. Schell & G. Gillen (Eds.), Willard and Spackman’s
occupational therapy (13th ed., pp. 436–447). Philadelphia: Wolters Kluwer.
Scaffa, M. E., & Reitz, S. M. (Eds.). (2014). Occupational therapy in
community-based practice settings (2nd ed.). Philadelphia: F. A. Davis.
Schell, B. A. B. (2019). Professional reasoning in practice. In B. A. B. Schell &
G. Gillen (Eds.), Willard and Spackman’s occupational therapy (13th ed.,
pp. 482–497). Philadelphia: Wolters Kluwer.
Schell, B. A. B., & Gillen, G. (2019). Glossary. In B. A. B. Schell & G. Gillen
(Eds.), Willard and Spackman’s occupational therapy (13th ed. pp.
1191–1215). Philadelphia: Wolters Kluwer.
Schell, B. A. B., Gillen, G., Crepeau, E., & Scaffa, M. (2019). Analyzing occupations
and activity. In B. A. B. Schell & G. Gillen (Eds.), Willard and Spackman’s
occupational therapy (13th ed., pp. 320–333). Philadelphia: Wolters Kluwer.
Schell, B. A. B., Gillen, G., & Scaffa, M. (2014). Glossary. In B. A. B. Schell, G.
Gillen & M. Scaffa (Eds.), Willard and Spackman’s occupational therapy
(12th ed., pp. 1229–1243). Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Schwartz, J. K., & Smith, R. O. (2017). Integration of medication management
into occupational therapy practice. American Journal of Occupational
Therapy, 71, 7104360010. https://doi.org/10.5014/ajot.2017.015032
Segal, R. (2004). Family routines and rituals: A context for occupational
therapy interventions. American Journal of Occupational Therapy, 58,
499–508. https://doi.org/10.5014/ajot.58.5.499
Skard, G., & Bundy, A. (2008). Test of Playfulness. In L. D. Parham & L. Fazio
(Eds.), Play in occupational therapy for children (2nd ed., pp. 71–93). St.
Louis: Mosby. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-032302954-4.10004-2
Slagle, E. C. (1924). A year’s development of occupational therapy in New
York State hospitals. Modern Hospital, 22, 98–104.
Snodgrass, J., & Amini, D. (2017). Occupational therapy practice guidelines for
adults with musculoskeletal conditions. Bethesda, MD: AOTA Press.
Sutton-Smith, B. (2009). The ambiguity of play. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Taylor, R. R. (Ed.). (2017). Kielhofner’s Model of Human Occupation: Theory
and application. Philadelphia: Wolters Kluwer Health.
Taylor, R. (2019). Therapeutic relationship and client collaboration: Applying
the Intentional Relationship Model. In B. A. B. Schell & G. Gillen (Eds.),
Willard and Spackman’s occupational therapy (13th ed., pp. 527–538).
Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
GUIDELINES
AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT 	71
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p71
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 71 of 87 --

Taylor, R. R. (2020). The intentional relationship: Occupational therapy and
use of self. Philadelphia: F. A. Davis.
Taylor, R. R., & Van Puymbrouck, L. (2013). Therapeutic use of self: Applying
the Intentional Relationship Model in group therapy. In J. C. O’Brien &
J. W. Solomon (Eds.), Occupational analysis and group process
(pp. 36–52). St. Louis: Elsevier.
Townsend, E., & Wilcock, A. A. (2004). Occupational justice and client-centred
practice: A dialogue in progress. Canadian Journal of Occupational
Therapy, 71, 75–87. https://doi.org/10.1177/000841740407100203
Trombly, C. A. (1995). Occupation: Purposefulness and meaningfulness as
therapeutic mechanisms (Eleanor Clarke Slagle Lecture). American Journal of
Occupational Therapy, 49, 960–972. https://doi.org/10.5014/ajot.49.10.960
Uniform Data System for Medical Rehabilitation. (1996). Guide for the Uni-
form Data Set for Medical Rehabilitation (including the FIM instrument).
Buffalo, NY: Author.
Unruh, A. M. (2004). Reflections on: “So . . . what do you do?” Occupation and
the construction of identity. Canadian Journal of Occupational Therapy,
71, 290–295. https://doi.org/10.1177/000841740407100508
Uyeshiro Simon, A., & Collins, C. E. R. (2017). Lifestyle Redesign ® for chronic
pain management: A retrospective clinical efficacy study. American
Journal of Occupational Therapy, 71, 7104190040. https://doi.org/10.
5014/ajot.2017.025502
Wagman, P., H ˚akansson, C., & Jonsson, H. (2015). Occupational balance: A
scoping review of current research and identified knowledge gaps.
Journal of Occupational Science, 22, 160–169. https://doi.org/10.1080/
14427591.2014.986512
Wellness. (1997). In Taber’s cyclopedic medical dictionary. Philadelphia:
F. A. Davis.
Wilcock, A. A. (2006). An occupational perspective of health (2nd ed.).
Thorofare, NJ: Slack.
Wilcock, A. A., & Townsend, E. A. (2019). Occupational justice. In B. A. B.
Schell & G. Gillen (Eds.), Willard and Spackman’s occupational therapy
(13th ed., pp. 643–659). Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
World Federation of Occupational Therapists. (2012a). About occupational
therapy. Retrieved from https://www.wfot.org/about-occupational-therapy
World Federation of Occupational Therapists. (2012b). Occupational sci-
ence [Position statement]. Retrieved from https://www.wfot.org/
resources/occupational-science
World Federation of Occupational Therapists. (2019). Occupational therapy and
community-centred practice [Position statement]. Retrieved from https://www.
wfot.org/resources/occupational-therapy-and-community-centred-practice
World Health Organization. (1986). The Ottawa Charter for Health Promotion. Retrieved
from https://www.who.int/healthpromotion/conferences/previous/ottawa/en/
World Health Organization. (2001). International classification of functioning,
disability and health. Geneva: Author.
World Health Organization. (2006). Constitution of the World Health Orga-
nization (45th ed.). Retrieved from https://www.who.int/governance/eb/
who_constitution_en.pdf
World Health Organization. (2008). International classification of functioning,
disability and health: ICF. Geneva: WHO Press.
Zemke, R., & Clark, F. (1996). Occupational science: An evolving discipline.
Philadelphia: F. A. Davis.
Authors
Cheryl Boop, MS, OTR/L
Susan M. Cahill, PhD, OTR/L, FAOTA
Charlotte Davis, MS, OTR/L
Julie Dorsey, OTD, OTR/L, CEAS, FAOTA
Varleisha Gibbs, PhD, OTD, OTR/L
Brian Herr, MOT, OTR/L
Kimberly Kearney, COTA/L
Elizabeth “Liz” Griffin Lannigan, PhD, OTR/L, FAOTA
Lizabeth Metzger, MS, OTR/L
Julie Miller, MOT, OTR/L, SWC
Amy Owens, OTR
Krysta Rives, MBA, COTA/L, CKTP
Caitlin Synovec, OTD, OTR/L, BCMH
Wayne L. Winistorfer, MPA, OTR, FAOTA
Deborah Lieberman, MHSA, OTR/L, FAOTA, AOTA Headquarters Liaison
for
The Commission on Practice
Julie Dorsey, OTD, OTR/L, CEAS, FAOTA, Chairperson
GUIDELINES
72 	AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p72
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 72 of 87 --

Acknowledgments
In addition to those named below, the COP thanks everyone who has contributed to the dialogue, feedback, and
concepts presented in the document. Sincerest appreciation is extended to AOTA Staff members Chris Davis,
Jennifer Folden, Caroline Polk, and Debbie Shelton for all their support. Further appreciation and thanks are
extended to Anne G. Fisher, ScD, OT, FAOTA; Lou Ann Griswold, PhD, OTR/L, FAOTA; and Abbey Marterella, PhD,
OTR/L.
The COP wishes to acknowledge the authors of the third edition of this document: Deborah Ann Amini, EdD, OTR/L,
CHT, FAOTA, Chairperson, 2011–2014; Kathy Kannenberg, MA, OTR/L, CCM, Chairperson-Elect, 2013–2014;
Stefanie Bodison, OTD, OTR/L; Pei-Fen Chang, PhD, OTR/L; Donna Colaianni, PhD, OTR/L, CHT; Beth Goodrich,
OTR, ATP, PhD; Lisa Mahaffey, MS, OTR/L, FAOTA; Mashelle Painter, MEd, COTA/L; Michael Urban, MS, OTR/L,
CEAS, MBA, CWCE; Dottie Handley-More, MS, OTR/L, SIS Liaison; Kiel Cooluris, MOT, OTR/L, ASD Liaison;
Andrea McElroy, MS, OTR/L, Immediate-Past ASD Liaison; Deborah Lieberman, MHSA, OTR/L, FAOTA, AOTA
Headquarters Liaison.
The COP wishes to acknowledge the authors of the second edition of this document: Susanne Smith Roley, MS, OTR/L,
FAOTA, Chairperson, 2005–2008; Janet V. DeLany, DEd, OTR/L, FAOTA; Cynthia J. Barrows, MS, OTR/L; Susan
Brownrigg, OTR/L; DeLana Honaker, PhD, OTR/L, BCP; Deanna Iris Sava, MS, OTR/L; Vibeke Talley, OTR/L; Kristi
Voelkerding, BS, COTA/L, ATP; Deborah Ann Amini, MEd, OTR/L, CHT, FAOTA, SIS Liaison; Emily Smith, MOT, ASD
Liaison; Pamela Toto, MS, OTR/L, BCG, FAOTA, Immediate-Past SIS Liaison; Sarah King, MOT, OTR, Immediate-Past
ASD Liaison; Deborah Lieberman, MHSA, OTR/L, FAOTA, AOTA Headquarters Liaison; with contributions from
M. Carolyn Baum, PhD, OTR/L, FAOTA; Ellen S. Cohn, ScD, OTR/L, FAOTA; Penelope A. Moyers Cleveland, EdD,
OTR/L, BCMH, FAOTA; and Mary Jane Youngstrom, MS, OTR, FAOTA.
The COP also wishes to acknowledge the authors of the first edition of this document: Mary Jane Youngstrom, MS, OTR,
FAOTA, Chairperson (1998–2002); Sara Jane Brayman, PhD, OTR, FAOTA, Chairperson-Elect (2001–2002); Paige
Anthony, COTA; Mary Brinson, MS, OTR/L, FAOTA; Susan Brownrigg, OTR/L; Gloria Frolek Clark, MS, OTR/L,
FAOTA; Susanne Smith Roley, MS, OTR; James Sellers, OTR/L; Nancy L. Van Slyke, EdD, OTR; Stacy M. Desmarais,
MS,OTR/L, ASD Liaison; Jane Oldham, MOTS, Immediate-Past ASCOTA Liaison; Mary Vining Radomski, MA, OTR,
FAOTA, SIS Liaison; Sarah D. Hertfelder, MEd, MOT, OTR, FAOTA, National Office Liaison.
Revised by the Commission on Practice, 2020
Adopted by the Representative Assembly May, 2020
Note. This document replaces the 2014 Occupational Therapy Practice Framework: Domain and Process (3rd ed.). Published in the American
Journal of Occupational Therapy, 74(Suppl. 2), 7412410010. https://dx.doi.org/10.5014/ajot.2020.74S2001
Copyright © 2020 by the American Occupational Therapy Association.
Citation: American Occupational Therapy Association. (2020). Occupational therapy practice framework: Domain and process (4th ed.). American
Journal of Occupational Therapy, 74(Suppl. 2), 7412410010. https://doi.org/10.5014/ajot.2020.74S2001
GUIDELINES
AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT 	73
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p73
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 73 of 87 --

Appendix A. Glossary
A
Activities
Actions designed and selected to support the development of performance skills and performance patterns to enhance
occupational engagement.
Activities of daily living (ADLs)
Activities that are oriented toward taking care of one’s own body (adapted from Rogers & Holm, 1994) and are
completed on a daily basis. These activities are “fundamental to living in a social world; they enable basic survival and
well-being” (Christiansen & Hammecker, 2001, p. 156; see Table 2).
Activity analysis
Generic and decontextualized analysis that seeks to develop an understanding of typical activity demands within a
given culture.
Activity demands
Aspects of an activity needed to carry it out, including relevance and importance to the client, objects used and their
properties, space demands, social demands, sequencing and timing, required actions and performance skills, and
required underlying body functions and body structures (see Table 11).
Adaptation
Effective and efficient response by the client to occupational and contextual demands (Grajo, 2019).
Advocacy
Efforts directed toward promoting occupational justice and empowering clients to seek and obtain resources to fully
participate in their daily life occupations. Efforts undertaken by the practitioner are considered advocacy, and those
undertaken by the client are considered self-advocacy and can be promoted and supported by the practitioner (see
Table 12).
Analysis of occupational performance
The step in the evaluation process in which the client’s assets and limitations or potential problems are more specifically
determined through assessment tools designed to analyze, measure, and inquire about factors that support or hinder
occupational performance (see Exhibit 2).
Assessment
“A specific tool, instrument, or systematic interaction . . . used to understand a client’s occupational profile, client factors,
performance skills, performance patterns, and contextual and environmental factors, as well as activity demands that
influence occupational performance” (Hinojosa et al., 2014, pp. 3–4).
GUIDELINES
74 	AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p74
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 74 of 87 --

B
Belief
Something that is accepted, considered to be true, or held as an opinion (“Belief,” 2020).
Body functions
“Physiological functions of body systems (including psychological functions)” (World Health Organization, 2001, p. 10;
see Table 9).
Body structures
“Anatomical parts of the body, such as organs, limbs, and their components” that support body functions (World Health
Organization, 2001, p. 10; see Table 9).
C
Client
Person (including one involved in the care of a client), group (collection of individuals having shared characteristics or
common or shared purpose, e.g., family members, workers, students, and those with similar interests or occupational
challenges), or population (aggregate of people with common attributes such as contexts, characteristics, or concerns,
including health risks; Scaffa & Reitz, 2014).
Client-centered care (client-centered practice)
Approach to service that incorporates respect for and partnership with clients as active participants in the therapy
process. This approach emphasizes clients’ knowledge and experience, strengths, capacity for choice, and overall
autonomy (Schell & Gillen, 2019, p. 1194).
Client factors
Specific capacities, characteristics, or beliefs that reside within the person and that influence performance in occu-
pations. Client factors include values, beliefs, and spirituality; body functions; and body structures (see Table 9).
Clinical reasoning
See Professional reasoning
Collaboration
“The complex interpretative acts in which the practitioners must understand the meanings of the interventions, the
meanings of illness or disability in a person and family’s life, and the feelings that accompany these experiences”
(Lawlor & Mattingly, 2019, p. 201).
Community
Collection of populations that is changeable and diverse and includes various people, groups, networks, and orga-
nizations (Scaffa, 2019; World Federation of Occupational Therapists, 2019).
GUIDELINES
AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT 	75
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p75
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 75 of 87 --

Context
Construct that constitutes the complete makeup of a person’s life as well as the common and divergent factors
that characterize groups and populations. Context includes environmental factors and personal factors (see Tables 4
and 5).
Co-occupation
Occupation that implicitly involves two or more individuals (Schell & Gillen, 2019, p. 1195) and includes aspects of
physicality, emotionality, and intentionality (Pickens & Pizur-Barnekow, 2009).
Cornerstone
Something of significance on which everything else depends.
D
Domain
Profession’s purview and areas in which its members have an established body of knowledge and expertise.
E
Education
As an occupation: Activities involved in learning and participating in the educational environment (see Table 2).
As an environmental factor of context: Processes and methods for acquisition of knowledge, expertise, or skills (see
Table 4).
As an intervention: Activities that impart knowledge and information about occupation, health, well-being, and par-
ticipation, resulting in acquisition by the client of helpful behaviors, habits, and routines that may or may not require
application at the time of the intervention session (see Table 12).
Empathy
Emotional exchange between occupational therapy practitioners and clients that allows more open communication,
ensuring that practitioners connect with clients at an emotional level to assist them with their current life situation.
Engagement in occupation
Performance of occupations as the result of choice, motivation, and meaning within a supportive context.
Environmental factors
Aspects of the physical, social, and attitudinal surroundings in which people live and conduct their lives.
Evaluation
“The comprehensive process of obtaining and interpreting the data necessary to understand the person, system, or
situation. . . . Evaluation requires synthesis of all data obtained, analytic interpretation of that data, reflective
clinical reasoning, and consideration of occupational performance and contextual factors” (Hinojosa et al., 2014,
p. 3).
GUIDELINES
76 	AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p76
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 76 of 87 --

G
Goal
Measurable and meaningful, occupation-based, long-term or short-term aim directly related to the client’s ability and
need to engage in desired occupations (AOTA, 2018a, p. 4).
Group
Collection of individuals having shared characteristics or a common or shared purpose (e.g., family members, workers,
students, others with similar occupational interests or occupational challenges).
Group intervention
Use of distinct knowledge and leadership techniques to facilitate learning and skill acquisition across the lifespan
through the dynamics of group and social interaction. Groups may be used as a method of service delivery (see
Table 12).
H
Habilitation
Health care services that help a person keep, learn, or improve skills and functioning for daily living (e.g., therapy for a
child who does not walk or talk at the expected age). These services may include physical and occupational therapy,
speech-language pathology, and other services for people with disabilities in a variety of inpatient and outpatient
settings (“Provision of EHB,” 2015).
Habits
“Specific, automatic behaviors performed repeatedly, relatively automatically, and with little variation” (Matuska &
Barrett, 2019, p. 214). Habits can be healthy or unhealthy, efficient or inefficient, and supportive or harmful (Dunn, 2000).
Health
“State of complete physical, mental, and social well-being, and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity” (World
Health Organization, 2006, p. 1).
Health management
Occupation focused on developing, managing, and maintaining routines for health and wellness by engaging in self-
care with the goal of improving or maintaining health, including self-management, to allow for participation in other
occupations (see Table 2).
Health promotion
“Process of enabling people to increase control over, and to improve, their health. To reach a state of complete physical,
mental, and social well-being, an individual or group must be able to identify and realize aspirations, to satisfy needs,
and to change or cope with the environment” (World Health Organization, 1986).
Hope
Real or perceived belief that one can move toward a goal through selected pathways.
GUIDELINES
AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT 	77
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p77
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 77 of 87 --

I
Independence
“Self-directed state of being characterized by an individual’s ability to participate in necessary and preferred occupations
in a satisfying manner irrespective of the amount or kind of external assistance desired or required” (AOTA, 2002a, p.
660).
Instrumental activities of daily living (IADLs)
Activities that support daily life within the home and community and that often require more complex interactions than
those used in ADLs (see Table 2).
Interdependence
“Reliance that people have on one another as a natural consequence of group living” (Christiansen & Townsend, 2010,
p. 419). “Interdependence engenders a spirit of social inclusion, mutual aid, and a moral commitment and responsibility
to recognize and support difference” (Christiansen & Townsend, 2010, p. 187).
Interests
“What one finds enjoyable or satisfying to do” (Kielhofner, 2008, p. 42).
Intervention
“Process and skilled actions taken by occupational therapy practitioners in collaboration with the client to facilitate
engagement in occupation related to health and participation. The intervention process includes the plan, imple-
mentation, and review” (AOTA, 2015c, p. 2).
Intervention approaches
Specific strategies selected to direct the process of interventions on the basis of the client’s desired outcomes,
evaluation data, and evidence (see Table 13).
Interventions to support occupations
Methods and tasks that prepare the client for occupational performance, used as part of a treatment session in
preparation for or concurrently with occupations and activities or provided to a client as a home-based engagement to
support daily occupational performance (see Table 12).
L
Leisure
“Nonobligatory activity that is intrinsically motivated and engaged in during discretionary time, that is, time
not committed to obligatory occupations such as work, self-care, or sleep” (Parham & Fazio, 1997, p. 250; see
Table 2).
GUIDELINES
78 	AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p78
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 78 of 87 --

M
Motor skills
The “group of performance skills that represent small, observable actions related to moving oneself or moving and
interacting with tangible task objects (e.g., tools, utensils, clothing, food or other supplies, digital devices, plant life) in the
context of performing a personally and ecologically relevant daily life task. They are commonly named in terms of type of
task being performed (e.g., [activity of daily living] motor skills, school motor skills, work motor skills)” (Fisher &
Marterella, 2019, p. 331; see Table 7).
O
Occupation
Everyday personalized activities that people do as individuals, in families, and with communities to occupy time and
bring meaning and purpose to life. Occupations can involve the execution of multiple activities for completion and can
result in various outcomes. The broad range of occupations is categorized as activities of daily living, instrumental
activities of daily living, health management, rest and sleep, education, work, play, leisure, and social participation (see
Table 2).
Occupation-based
Characteristic of the best practice method used in occupational therapy, in which the practitioner uses an evaluation
process and types of interventions that actively engage the client in occupation (Fisher & Marterella, 2019).
Occupational analysis
Analysis that is performed with an understanding of “the specific situation of the client and therefore [of] the specific
occupations the client wants or needs to do in the actual context in which these occupations are performed” (Schell
et al., 2019, p. 322).
Occupational demands
Aspects of an activity needed to carry it out, including relevance and importance to the client, objects used and their
properties, space demands, social demands, sequencing and timing, required actions and performance skills, and
required underlying body functions and body structures (see Table 10).
Occupational identity
“Composite sense of who one is and wishes to become as an occupational being generated from one’s history of
occupational participation” (Schell & Gillen, 2019, p. 1205).
Occupational justice
“A justice that recognizes occupational rights to inclusive participation in everyday occupations for all persons in society,
regardless of age, ability, gender, social class, or other differences” (Nilsson & Townsend, 2010, p. 58). Occupational
justice includes access to and participation in the full range of meaningful and enriching occupations afforded to others,
including opportunities for social inclusion and the resources to participate in occupations to satisfy personal, health,
and societal needs (adapted from Townsend & Wilcock, 2004).
GUIDELINES
AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT 	79
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p79
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 79 of 87 --

Occupational performance
Accomplishment of the selected occupation resulting from the dynamic transaction among the client, their context, and
the occupation.
Occupational profile
Summary of the client’s occupational history and experiences, patterns of daily living, interests, values, needs, and
relevant contexts (see Exhibit 2).
Occupational science
“Way of thinking that enables an understanding of occupation, the occupational nature of humans, the relationship
between occupation, health and wellbeing, and the influences that shape occupation” (World Federation of
Occupational Therapists, 2012b, p. 2).
Occupational therapy
Therapeutic use of everyday life occupations with persons, groups, or populations (i.e., clients) for the purpose of
enhancing or enabling participation. Occupational therapy practitioners use their knowledge of the transactional re-
lationship among the person, their engagement in valued occupations, and the context to design occupation-based
intervention plans. Occupational therapy services are provided for habilitation, rehabilitation, and promotion of health
and wellness for clients with disability- and non-disability-related needs. Services promote acquisition and preservation
of occupational identity for those who have or are at risk for developing an illness, injury, disease, disorder, condition,
impairment, disability, activity limitation, or participation restriction (adapted from American Occupational Therapy
Association, 2011).
Organization
Entity composed of individuals with a common purpose or enterprise, such as a business, industry, or agency.
Outcome
Result clients can achieve through the occupational therapy process (see Table 14).
P
Participation
“Involvement in a life situation” (World Health Organization, 2001, p. 10).
Performance patterns
Habits, routines, roles, and rituals that may be associated with different lifestyles and used in the process of engaging in
occupations or activities. These patterns are influenced by context and time and can support or hinder occupational
performance (see Table 6).
Performance skills
Observable, goal-directed actions that result in a client’s quality of performing desired occupations. Skills are supported
by the context in which the performance occurred and by underlying client factors (Fisher & Marterella, 2019).
GUIDELINES
80 	AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p80
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 80 of 87 --

Person
Individual, including family member, caregiver, teacher, employee, or relevant other.
Personal factors
Unique features of the person reflecting the particular background of their life and living that are not part of a health
condition or health state. Personal factors are generally considered to be enduring, stable attributes of the person,
although some personal factors may change over time (see Table 5).
Play
Active engagement in an activity that is intrinsically motivated, internally controlled, and freely chosen and that may
include the suspension of reality (Skard & Bundy, 2008). Play includes participation in a broad range of experiences
including but not limited to exploration, humor, fantasy, risk, contest, and celebrations (Eberle, 2014; Sutton-Smith,
2009). Play is a complex and multidimensional phenomenon that is shaped by sociocultural factors (Lynch et al., 2016;
see Table 2).
Population
Aggregate of people with common attributes such as contexts, characteristics, or concerns, including health risks.
Prevention
Education or health promotion efforts designed to identify, reduce, or prevent the onset and decrease the incidence of
unhealthy conditions, risk factors, diseases, or injuries (American Occupational Therapy Association, 2020a).
Process
Series of steps occupational therapy practitioners use to operationalize their expertise in providing services to clients.
The occupational therapy process includes evaluation, intervention, and outcomes; occurs within the purview of the
occupational therapy domain; and involves collaboration among the occupational therapist, occupational therapy
assistant, and client.
Process skills
The “group of performance skills that represent small, observable actions related to selecting, interacting with, and using
tangible task objects (e.g., tools, utensils, clothing, food or other supplies, digital devices, plant life); carrying out
individual actions and steps; and preventing problems of occupational performance from occurring or reoccurring in the
context of performing a personally and ecologically relevant daily life task. They are commonly named in terms of type of
task being performed (e.g., [activity of daily living] process skills, school process skills, work process skills)” (Fisher &
Marterella, 2019, pp. 336–337; see Table 7).
Professional reasoning
“Process that practitioners use to plan, direct, perform, and reflect on client care” (Schell, 2019, p. 482).
GUIDELINES
AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT 	81
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p81
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 81 of 87 --

Q
Quality of life
Dynamic appraisal of life satisfaction (perception of progress toward identifying goals), self-concept (beliefs and feelings
about oneself), health and functioning (e.g., health status, self-care capabilities), and socioeconomic factors (e.g.,
vocation, education, income; adapted from Radomski, 1995).
R
Reevaluation
Reappraisal of the client’s performance and goals to determine the type and amount of change that has taken
place.
Rehabilitation
Services provided to persons experiencing deficits in key areas of physical and other types of function or limitations in
participation in daily life activities. Interventions are designed to enable the achievement and maintenance of optimal
physical, sensory, intellectual, psychological, and social functional levels. Rehabilitation services provide tools and
techniques clients need to attain desired levels of independence and self-determination.
Rituals
For persons: Sets of symbolic actions with spiritual, cultural, or social meaning contributing to the client’s identity and
reinforcing values and beliefs. Rituals have a strong affective component (Fiese, 2007; Fiese et al., 2002; Segal, 2004;
see Table 6).
For groups and populations: Shared social actions with traditional, emotional, purposive, and technological meaning
contributing to values and beliefs within the group or population (see Table 6).
Roles
For persons: Sets of behaviors expected by society and shaped by culture and context that may be further con-
ceptualized and defined by the client (see Table 6).
For groups and populations: Sets of behaviors by the group or population expected by society and shaped
by culture and context that may be further conceptualized and defined by the group or population
(see Table 6).
Routines
For persons, groups, and populations: Patterns of behavior that are observable, regular, and repetitive and
that provide structure for daily life. They can be satisfying and promoting or damaging. Routines require
momentary time commitment and are embedded in cultural and ecological contexts (Fiese et al., 2002; Segal, 2004;
see Table 6).
GUIDELINES
82 	AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p82
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 82 of 87 --

S
Screening
“Process of reviewing available data, observing a client, or administering screening instruments to identify a person’s (or
a population’s) potential strengths and limitations and the need for further assessment” (Hinojosa et al., 2014, p. 3).
Self-advocacy
Advocacy for oneself, including making one’s own decisions about life, learning how to obtain information to gain an
understanding about issues of personal interest or importance, developing a network of support, knowing one’s rights
and responsibilities, reaching out to others when in need of assistance, and learning about self-determination.
Service delivery
Set of approaches and methods for providing services to or on behalf of clients.
Skilled services
To be covered as skilled therapy, services must require the skills of a qualified occupational therapy practitioner and
must be reasonable and necessary for the treatment of the patient’s condition, illness, or injury. Skilled therapy services
may be necessary to improve a patient’s current condition, to maintain the patient’s current condition, or to prevent or
slow further deterioration of the patient’s condition. Practitioners should check their payer policies to ensure they meet
payer definitions and comply with payer requirements.
Social interaction skills
The “group of performance skills that represent small, observable actions related to communicating and interacting with
others in the context of engaging in a personally and ecologically relevant daily life task performance that involves social
interaction with others” (Fisher & Marterella, 2019, p. 342).
Social participation
“Interweaving of occupations to support desired engagement in community and family activities as well as those
involving peers and friends” (Schell & Gillen, 2019, p. 711) involvement in a subset of activities that incorporate social
situations with others (Bedell, 2012) and that support social interdependence (Magasi & Hammel, 2004; see Table 2).
Spirituality
“Deep experience of meaning brought about by engaging in occupations that involve the enacting of personal values
and beliefs, reflection, and intention within a supportive contextual environment” (Billock, 2005, p. 887). It is important to
recognize spirituality “as dynamic and often evolving” (Humbert, 2016, p. 12).
T
Time management
Manner in which a person, group, or population organizes, schedules, and prioritizes certain activities.
Transaction
Process that involves two or more individuals or elements that reciprocally and continually influence and affect one
another through the ongoing relationship (Dickie et al., 2006).
GUIDELINES
AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT 	83
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p83
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 83 of 87 --

V
Values
Acquired beliefs and commitments, derived from culture, about what is good, right, and important to do (Kielhofner,
2008).
W
Well-being
“General term encompassing the total universe of human life domains, including physical, mental, and social aspects,
that make up what can be called a ‘good life’” (World Health Organization, 2006, p. 211).
Wellness
“The individual’s perception of and responsibility for psychological and physical well-being as these contribute to overall
satisfaction with one’s life situation” (Schell & Gillen, 2019, p. 1215).
Work
Labor or exertion related to the development, production, delivery, or management of objects or services; benefits may
be financial or nonfinancial (e.g., social connectedness, contributions to society, adding structure and routine to daily
life; Christiansen & Townsend, 2010; Dorsey et al., 2019).
GUIDELINES
84 	AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p84
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 84 of 87 --

Index
Note: Page numbers in italic refer to exhibits, figures, and tables.
activities
defined, 74
interventions for, 59
activities of daily living (ADLs)
overview, 30, 74
examples, 35
activity analysis, 19–20, 74
activity demands, 57–58, 74
adaptation, 74
advocacy, 61–62, 74
American Occupational Therapy
Association (AOTA)
Commission on Practice
(COP), 3
Representative Assembly
(RA), 2–3
analysis of occupational perfor-
mance, 74
animals, 31
assessment, 74
assistive technology (AT), 60
bathing, 30
beliefs
defined, 15, 75
occupational performance and,
51
body functions and body
structures
overview, 15, 75
occupational performance and,
51–54
cardiovascular system functions, 53
care of others, 30
care of pets and animals, 31
case management, 19
child rearing, 31
client factors
beliefs, 51
body functions and body
structures, 51–54
defined, 75
domain and, 15
spirituality, 51
values, 51
client-centered care (client-centered
practice), 75
clients
defined, 75
examples, 29
terminology, 2, 24
clinical reasoning, 20, 75
Commission on Practice (COP), 3
communication management, 31
communication with the health
care system, 32
community, 2, 75
community mobility, 29, 31
community participation, 34
consumers, 24
context
defined, 76
environmental factors, 36–39
personal factors, 40
co-occupations, 76
cornerstones of occupational
therapy practice, 6, 76
direct services, 18
discontinuation, 27
domain
aspects of, 5, 6
client factors, 15
defined, 76
environmental factors, 9–10
occupational justice, 11–12
occupations and, 6–9
performance patterns, 12–13
performance skills, 12–15
personal factors, 10–11
dressing, 30
driving, 31
eating and swallowing, 30
education
overview, 33, 76
examples, 35
interventions for, 61
empathy, 76
employment, 33–34. see also
work
engagement in occupation, 5–6,
76
enhancement, 65–66
environmental factors, 9–10,
36–39, 76
environmental modifications, 60
episodic care, 19
evaluation
overview, 23, 76
process, 16, 55
synthesis of, 23
family participation, 34
family-centered care approaches,
19
feeding, 29, 30
financial management, 31
friendships, 34
functional mobility, 30
goals, 77
group interventions, 62, 77
groups
defined, 2, 77
examples, 29
GUIDELINES
AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT 	85
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p85
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 85 of 87 --

performance patterns, 41–42
performance skills and, 14, 50
process, 55–56
The Guide to Occupational
Therapy Practice (Moyers), 3
habilitation, 77
habits, 12, 41, 77
health and wellness, 5, 66, 77
health management
overview, 32
defined, 77
examples, 29, 35
health promotion, 24, 77
hematological and immune
system functions, 53
home establishment and
management, 29, 31
hope, 77
immune system functions, 53
improvement, 65
independence, 78
indirect services, 18–19
instrumental activities of daily
living (IADLs)
overview, 30–31, 78
examples, 35
interdependence, 78
interests, 78
intervention
approaches to, 63–64, 78
defined, 78
for education, 61
group interventions, 62
intervention implementation, 25
intervention plan, 24–25
intervention review, 25
process, 16–17, 23–26, 55–56
supporting occupations, 78
for training, 61
types of, 59–62
virtual interventions, 62
intimate partner relationships, 34
job performance and
maintenance, 33. see also work
leisure
overview, 34, 78
examples, 35
meal preparation and cleanup, 31
medication management, 32
members, 24
mental functions, 52
motor skills, 13, 43–44, 50, 79
movement-related functions, 53
neuromusculoskeletal functions, 53
nutrition management, 32
occupational adaptation, 26
occupational analysis, 19–20, 79
occupational demands, 79
occupational identity, 79
occupational justice, 11–12,
67–68, 79
occupational performance
analysis, 16, 23
client factors, 51–54
defined, 80
outcomes, 65
occupational profile, 16, 21–22, 80
occupational science, 80
occupational therapy, 1, 4, 80
Occupational Therapy Code of
Ethics, 24
occupational therapy practice
cornerstones, 6
occupational therapy
practitioners, 1
Occupational Therapy Product
Output Reporting System and
Uniform Terminology for
Reporting Occupational
Therapy Services, 2
occupation-based practice, 79
occupations
activities of daily living (ADLs), 30, 35
defined, 79
domain and, 6–9
education, 33, 35
health management, 32, 35
instrumental activities of daily living
(IADLs), 30–31, 35
interventions for, 59
leisure, 34, 35
play, 34, 35
rest and sleep, 32–33, 35
social participation, 34, 35
work, 33–34, 35
organization, 80
organization-level practice, 19
orthotics and prosthetics, 60
outcomes
overview, 26–27, 80
descriptions and examples, 65–68
process, 17, 56
PAMs and mechanical modalities, 59
participation, 5, 67, 80
patient-reported outcomes
(PROs), 27. see also outcomes
patients, 24
peer group participation, 34
performance patterns, 12–13,
41–42, 80
performance skills
defined, 81
domain and, 12–15
motor skills, 13, 43–44, 50
process skills, 13, 44–47, 50
social interaction skills, 13, 47–49
personal care device management, 32
personal factors, 10–11, 40, 81
personal hygiene and grooming, 30
GUIDELINES
86 	AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p86
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 86 of 87 --

persons
defined, 2, 81
examples, 29
performance patterns, 41
performance skills and, 14, 43–49
process, 55–56
pets and animals, 31
physical activity, 32
play
overview, 34, 81
examples, 35
populations
defined, 2, 81
examples, 29
performance patterns, 41–42
performance skills and, 15
process, 55–56
prevention, 66, 81
process
overview, 15–19
activity analysis, 19–20
aspects of, 5
case management, 19
clinical reasoning, 20
defined, 81
direct services, 18
episodic care, 19
evaluation, 16, 23
family-centered care approaches, 19
groups, 55–56
indirect services, 18–19
intervention, 16–17, 23–26
occupational analysis, 19–20
occupational performance, 16
occupational profile, 16
organization-level practice, 19
outcomes, 17
persons, 55–56
populations, 55–56
professional reasoning, 20
service delivery approaches, 18–19
systems-level practice, 19
telehealth, 19
therapeutic use of self, 20
process skills
overview, 13, 81
performance skills, 44–47, 50
professional reasoning, 20, 81
prosthetics, 60
quality of life, 66, 82
reevaluation, 82
rehabilitation, 82
religious and spiritual
expression, 31
Representative Assembly (RA), 2–3
respiratory system functions, 53
rest and sleep, 32–33, 35
retirement preparation and
adjustment, 34
revisions, 3–4
rituals, 12, 41–42, 82
role competence, 67
roles, 12, 41–42, 82
routines, 12, 41, 82
safety and emergency
maintenance, 31
screening, 83
self-advocacy, 62, 83
self-regulation, 60
sensory functions, 52–53
service delivery, 18–19, 83
sexual activity, 30
shopping, 31
showering, 30
skilled services, 83
skin and related structure functions, 54
sleep, 33. see also rest and sleep
social and emotional health
promotion and maintenance, 32
social interaction skills, 13,
47–49, 83
social participation
overview, 34, 83
examples, 29, 35
speech functions, 54
spiritual expression, 31
spirituality
defined, 15, 83
occupational performance and, 51
Standards of Practice for
Occupational Therapy, 24
students, 24
swallowing, 30
symptom and condition
management, 32
systems-level practice, 19
telehealth, 19, 62
therapeutic use of self, 20
time, time management and time
use, 12, 83
toileting and toilet hygiene, 30
training interventions, 61
transaction, 83
transition, 27
Uniform Terminology for Oc-
cupational Therapy, 2
values
defined, 15, 84
occupational performance and, 51
virtual interventions, 62
voice and speech functions, 54
volunteer exploration and
participation, 34
well-being, 5, 67, 84
wellness, 84
wheeled mobility, 60
work
overview, 33–34, 84
examples, 35
work participation, examples, 29
GUIDELINES
AOTA OFFICIAL DOCUMENT 	87
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, August 2020, Vol. 74, Suppl. 2 	7412410010p87
Downloaded from http://research.aota.org/ajot/article-pdf/74/Supplement_2/7412410010p1/71165/7412410010p1.pdf by Gretchen Bachman on 03 February 2022

-- 87 of 87 --

